1) The magnitude of sensitivity correlated with HR-repair reduced proficiency and with the expression levels and activity of PARP1 protein.
2) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
3) However, overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF in TGCT cell lines elicits only a small increase in their ICL-repair proficiency and resistance to cisplatin [10].
4) Thus the different kinetic of repair is not linked to different timing of cell cycle arrest.Figure 2Figure 2The inability of NT2D1 cell line to repair ICL-induced DSBs, is not rescued by preventing their apoptotic response.Reduced Expression of NER-repair Factors does not Fully Account for the Differential Sensitivity of EC Cells to CisplatinThe reduced expression of NER-proteins XPF and ERCC1 has been proposed to explain TGCT sensitivity to DNA damaging agents [9], [10].
6) As controls, we used three human fibroblast cell lines, one with significantly reduced expression of ERCC1 (165TOR) [29], one lacking XPF (XP2YO) [30] and a XP2YO cell line complemented with XPF (XP-F) [31].
7) Similar to a previous report [9], TGCT cell lines had somewhat reduced ERCC1 expression compared to U2OS (Fig. 3A and C); however, XPF protein levels were not obviously reduced in most cell lines (Fig. 3B and D).
8) Because XPF and ERCC1 act as heterodimer, reduced expression in ERCC1 might drive the reduction in ICL-repair proficiency, promoting sensitivity of ECs to cisplatin.
9) However, within EC cell lines, we did not observe a correlation between cisplatin resistance and ERCC1 expression levels.
10) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
11) These data demonstrate that EC cell lines have a reduced proficiency in HR.Figure 4Figure 4ECs are defective in HR repair.To understand whether the defect in the assembly of RAD51 foci observed in most EC cell lines was the consequence of reduced expression of the protein, we performed a western blot analysis.
12) RAD51 was similarly expressed in U2OS as in EC cell lines (Fig. 5A top panel, and Fig. 5B), indicating that a functional deficiency in formation of RAD51 foci rather than differential expression of this protein may cause an the HR defect.
13) Because PTEN expression was reported to be virtually absent in 86% of ECs [37], we analyzed protein expression in our EC cell lines.
14) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
15) Therefore, we analyzed BRCA1 protein expression in EC cell lines as compared to HR-proficient U2OS.
16) As shown in Fig. 5D–E, BRCA1 expression was reduced, with respect to U2OS, in Tera-1 and NT2D1 cell lines, but not in 27x-1 and 2102Ep, and not significantly in NCCIT.
17) Recent evidence indicates that the treatment of U2OS with the PARP inhibitor PHEN down-regulates BRCA1/RAD51 expression causing a defect in HR [45].
18) We asked whether sensitivity of EC cell lines to AZD2281 correlates with PARP1 protein expression and activity.
19) Using an in vitro assay, we measured the maximal PARP activity (induced by the presence of nuclease-treated DNA) and correlated the results with PARP1 protein expression levels.
20) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
21) Usanova observed that the overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF could partially reverse the cisplatin-sensitivity of TGCT cell lines [10], suggesting that a reduced proficiency in ICL-repair, induced by the low expression of these factors, in EC cells might promote cisplatin sensitivity [9].
23) In addition, among EC cell lines, there was no correlation between levels of ERCC1 expression and cell sensitivity to DNA damage.Because the ability of cycling cells to repair ICLs requires HR [15], [17], we hypothesized that EC cells may be defective in this pathway.
24) These results suggest that perhaps 27x-1 cells are defective in a step downstream of RAD51 foci formation, and more in general that ECs are functionally defective in HR-repair, as also suggested by the similar expression of RAD51 in all cell lines (Fig. 5A–B).
25) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
26) Interestingly, PARP1 protein expression correlates with its inducible activity in most EC cells, (Fig. 7B–C) and thus might represent a predictive marker for response to PARP-inhibitors monotherapy in EC cells despite its lack of predictive ability in other tumor models [55].
27) All images were acquired at 100x magnification.DSB AssaysDSB repair was measured by using a GFP-based assay for HR as described previously [35] In brief, efficiency of HR was assessed by co-transfecting an I-SceI expression plasmid (pCBASce) with a GFP-reporter substrate (DR-GFP).
28) The assay works through gene conversion repair of a DSB caused by I-SceI digestion; such that the DR-GFP plasmids repaired by HR express GFP (see Fig. S3A).
29) U2OS and EC cells were transiently transfected (Amaxa Biotechnology) with 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of I-SceI expressing vector or 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of control plasmids (pCAGGS).
32) PARP activity was expressed as pmol of 32P-NAD+/mg of protein.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Cell cycle distribution and mean percentage of γH2AX positive cells in G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle in exponential phase populations of U2OS and EC cell lines treated (or untreated) with cisplatin.
36) Sperger JM, Chen X, Draper JS, Antosiewicz JE, Chon CH, et al. (2003) Gene expression patterns in human embryonic stem cells and human pluripotent germ cell tumors.
37) Zaremba T, Ketzer P, Cole M, Coulthard S, Plummer ER, et al. (2009) Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 polymorphisms, expression and activity in selected human tumour cell lines.
38) Understanding the mechanisms underlying TGCT sensitivity/resistance to cisplatin as well as the identification of novel strategies to target cisplatin-resistant TGCTs have major clinical implications.
39) These results point to a reduced proficiency of HR repair as a source of sensitivity of ECs to ICL-inducing agents and PARP inhibitor monotherapy, and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of PARP can be exploited to target the stem cell component of the TGCTs (namely ECs) and to enhance the sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant TGCTs to standard treatments.Go to:IntroductionTesticular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) develop from pre-malignant intratubular germ cell neoplasia and are histologically distinguished in seminomas and nonseminomas.
40) Therefore, the development of new therapeutic strategies to target ECs, and platinum-resistant TGCTs represents a clinical priority.The underlying biological mechanism(s) responsible for the cisplatin sensitivity/resistance of TGCTs remains unknown.
41) These findings suggest that PARP inhibitors are a potential novel candidates for targeted treatment of ECs and TGCTs otherwise resistant to standard therapies.Go to:ResultsEmbryonal Carcinoma (EC) Cell Lines Exhibit Differential Sensitivities to CisplatinTo determine the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin, we analyzed their ability to survive drug treatment by colony-forming assays (Fig. 1A).
42) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
44) These results point to a reduced proficiency of HR repair as a source of sensitivity of ECs to ICL-inducing agents and PARP inhibitor monotherapy, and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of PARP can be exploited to target the stem cell component of the TGCTs (namely ECs) and to enhance the sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant TGCTs to standard treatments.Go to:IntroductionTesticular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) develop from pre-malignant intratubular germ cell neoplasia and are histologically distinguished in seminomas and nonseminomas.
48) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
49) As a control for cisplatin-resistant cells, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell line MCF10A.
50) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
51) However, while in the somatic tumor cell line U2OS γH2AX signal quickly decreased and returned nearly to control level by 72 hs, even in relatively cisplatin resistant EC cell lines (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1), γH2AX reduction was much less efficient (Fig. 1B and H, and Fig. S1 I–K).
52) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
53) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
56) This observation suggests that ECs can have or acquire molecular characteristic that render them more resistant to treatment, increasing the risk of incomplete response and tumor relapse.Why are EC cells generally more sensitive to DNA damaging agents than somatic tumors and why are some EC cell lines more sensitive to cisplatin than others?
57) We observed that the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage measured by γH2AX staining (Fig. 1B [t = 6 hs] and Fig. 4D), is not significantly different in EC cell lines compared to the somatic tumor cell line U2OS; indicating that the superior responsiveness of EC cells to cisplatin is not attributable to upstream events that regulate cisplatin damage to DNA.TRP53 is intimately involved in the induction of apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and resistance to therapy following DNA damage.
59) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
60) In addition, the observation that PARP-inducible activity is higher in the most PARP inhibitor-sensitive EC cells (Fig. 7A) suggest that in these tumors PARP activation might be required to compensate for the HR defect.
61) Interestingly, PARP1 protein expression correlates with its inducible activity in most EC cells, (Fig. 7B–C) and thus might represent a predictive marker for response to PARP-inhibitors monotherapy in EC cells despite its lack of predictive ability in other tumor models [55].
66) Pont J, Holtl W, Kosak D, Machacek E, Kienzer H, et al. (1990) Risk-adapted treatment choice in stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer by regarding vascular invasion in the primary tumor: a prospective trial.
68) Welsh C, Day R, McGurk C, Masters JR, Wood RD, et al. (2004) Reduced levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins in testis tumor cell lines.
69) Damjanov I, Horvat B, Gibas Z (1993) Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of the developmentally pluripotent human germ cell tumor-derived cell line, NCCIT.
70) Sperger JM, Chen X, Draper JS, Antosiewicz JE, Chon CH, et al. (2003) Gene expression patterns in human embryonic stem cells and human pluripotent germ cell tumors.
71) Moynahan ME, Jasin M (2010) Mitotic homologous recombination maintains genomic stability and suppresses tumorigenesis.
77) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
78) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
79) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
80) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
81) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
82) As result, the percentage of apoptotic cell death as measured 72 hs after the beginning of treatment was increased with respect to either cisplatin or AZD2281 monotherapy treatments (Fig. 8C), validating the effect of the combined therapy.Go to:DiscussionEmbryonal carcinomas (ECs) are considered the stem cell component of nonseminomatous TGCTs and, as cancer stem cells, maintain self-renewal capacity and are often multipotent.
88) Pont J, Holtl W, Kosak D, Machacek E, Kienzer H, et al. (1990) Risk-adapted treatment choice in stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer by regarding vascular invasion in the primary tumor: a prospective trial.
92) Inbar-Rozensal D, Castiel A, Visochek L, Castel D, Dantzer F, et al. (2009) A selective eradication of human nonhereditary breast cancer cells by phenanthridine-derived polyADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors.
93) The latter requires several classes of proteins including the nucleotide excision repair (NER) proteins XPF-ERCC1, translesion DNA-polymerases, Fanconi anemia gene products [12], [13], [14], and homologous recombination repair (HR) factors [15].
94) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
95) In this assay, repair of DSB by HR results in reconstitution of a functional GFP gene such that HR-proficiency can be quantified by FACS analysis [35] (Fig.S3A).
97) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
99) This observation suggests that ECs can have or acquire molecular characteristic that render them more resistant to treatment, increasing the risk of incomplete response and tumor relapse.Why are EC cells generally more sensitive to DNA damaging agents than somatic tumors and why are some EC cell lines more sensitive to cisplatin than others?
101) These results suggest that perhaps 27x-1 cells are defective in a step downstream of RAD51 foci formation, and more in general that ECs are functionally defective in HR-repair, as also suggested by the similar expression of RAD51 in all cell lines (Fig. 5A–B).
102) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
103) The assay works through gene conversion repair of a DSB caused by I-SceI digestion; such that the DR-GFP plasmids repaired by HR express GFP (see Fig. S3A).
106) Andrews PW, Damjanov I, Berends J, Kumpf S, Zappavigna V, et al. (1994) Inhibition of proliferation and induction of differentiation of pluripotent human embryonal carcinoma cells by osteogenic protein-1 (or bone morphogenetic protein-7).
107) Moynahan ME, Jasin M (2010) Mitotic homologous recombination maintains genomic stability and suppresses tumorigenesis.
110) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
114) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
116) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
117) The cytotoxicity of PARP inhibitors has been postulated to result from an increased number of double strand breaks in cells that can poorly repair them [18], [19] and/or from dysregulation of the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway [20].In this report, we show that the cisplatin-sensitivity of ECs is due to their inability to repair ICL-induced damage.
118) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
119) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
120) Recent evidence indicates that the treatment of U2OS with the PARP inhibitor PHEN down-regulates BRCA1/RAD51 expression causing a defect in HR [45].
121) We observed that the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage measured by γH2AX staining (Fig. 1B [t = 6 hs] and Fig. 4D), is not significantly different in EC cell lines compared to the somatic tumor cell line U2OS; indicating that the superior responsiveness of EC cells to cisplatin is not attributable to upstream events that regulate cisplatin damage to DNA.TRP53 is intimately involved in the induction of apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and resistance to therapy following DNA damage.
123) 27x-1 cell line is also wild type for p53, as shown by p53 (and p21) up-regulation upon cisplatin treatment (see Fig. S6).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(140K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe thank Prof. Claudio Sette, Prof. Raffaele Geremia (University of Rome Tor Vergata) and Dr. Monica Di Giacomo (European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Monterotondo, Rome, Italy) for the helpful discussion and critical reading of the manuscript.
181) The magnitude of sensitivity correlated with HR-repair reduced proficiency and with the expression levels and activity of PARP1 protein.
182) Another attractive hypothesis is that TGCTs display a reduced capacity to repair cisplatin-induced DNA damage [1], [9], [10].Cisplatin causes multiple types of DNA damage, such as mono-adducts, intrastrand crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and interstrand crosslinks (ICLs).
183) The latter requires several classes of proteins including the nucleotide excision repair (NER) proteins XPF-ERCC1, translesion DNA-polymerases, Fanconi anemia gene products [12], [13], [14], and homologous recombination repair (HR) factors [15].
184) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
185) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
186) Thus the different kinetic of repair is not linked to different timing of cell cycle arrest.Figure 2Figure 2The inability of NT2D1 cell line to repair ICL-induced DSBs, is not rescued by preventing their apoptotic response.Reduced Expression of NER-repair Factors does not Fully Account for the Differential Sensitivity of EC Cells to CisplatinThe reduced expression of NER-proteins XPF and ERCC1 has been proposed to explain TGCT sensitivity to DNA damaging agents [9], [10].
188) Similar to a previous report [9], TGCT cell lines had somewhat reduced ERCC1 expression compared to U2OS (Fig. 3A and C); however, XPF protein levels were not obviously reduced in most cell lines (Fig. 3B and D).
189) These data demonstrate that EC cell lines have a reduced proficiency in HR.Figure 4Figure 4ECs are defective in HR repair.To understand whether the defect in the assembly of RAD51 foci observed in most EC cell lines was the consequence of reduced expression of the protein, we performed a western blot analysis.
190) RAD51 was similarly expressed in U2OS as in EC cell lines (Fig. 5A top panel, and Fig. 5B), indicating that a functional deficiency in formation of RAD51 foci rather than differential expression of this protein may cause an the HR defect.
191) Because PTEN expression was reported to be virtually absent in 86% of ECs [37], we analyzed protein expression in our EC cell lines.
192) Therefore, we analyzed BRCA1 protein expression in EC cell lines as compared to HR-proficient U2OS.
193) We asked whether sensitivity of EC cell lines to AZD2281 correlates with PARP1 protein expression and activity.
194) Using an in vitro assay, we measured the maximal PARP activity (induced by the presence of nuclease-treated DNA) and correlated the results with PARP1 protein expression levels.
195) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
196) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
197) Interestingly, PARP1 protein expression correlates with its inducible activity in most EC cells, (Fig. 7B–C) and thus might represent a predictive marker for response to PARP-inhibitors monotherapy in EC cells despite its lack of predictive ability in other tumor models [55].
198) After 15 minutes at 30°C the reaction was stopped by addition of ice-cold trichloroacetic acid 20% (v/v) and the radioactivity associated with the acid-insoluble material, corresponding to poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated proteins, was counted on a Beckman LS8100 liquid scintillation counter.
199) PARP activity was expressed as pmol of 32P-NAD+/mg of protein.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Cell cycle distribution and mean percentage of γH2AX positive cells in G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle in exponential phase populations of U2OS and EC cell lines treated (or untreated) with cisplatin.
201) All cell lines but NCCIT (not shown) are wild-type for TRP53, as shown by the increase of both p53 and p21 proteins level upon cisplatin treatment.
202) Welsh C, Day R, McGurk C, Masters JR, Wood RD, et al. (2004) Reduced levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins in testis tumor cell lines.
203) Andrews PW, Damjanov I, Berends J, Kumpf S, Zappavigna V, et al. (1994) Inhibition of proliferation and induction of differentiation of pluripotent human embryonal carcinoma cells by osteogenic protein-1 (or bone morphogenetic protein-7).
204) As a control for cisplatin-resistant cells, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell line MCF10A.
205) As controls, we used three human fibroblast cell lines, one with significantly reduced expression of ERCC1 (165TOR) [29], one lacking XPF (XP2YO) [30] and a XP2YO cell line complemented with XPF (XP-F) [31].
208) Damjanov I, Horvat B, Gibas Z (1993) Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of the developmentally pluripotent human germ cell tumor-derived cell line, NCCIT.
209) Sperger JM, Chen X, Draper JS, Antosiewicz JE, Chon CH, et al. (2003) Gene expression patterns in human embryonic stem cells and human pluripotent germ cell tumors.
210) Andrews PW, Damjanov I, Berends J, Kumpf S, Zappavigna V, et al. (1994) Inhibition of proliferation and induction of differentiation of pluripotent human embryonal carcinoma cells by osteogenic protein-1 (or bone morphogenetic protein-7).
212) Jaspers NG, Raams A, Silengo MC, Wijgers N, Niedernhofer LJ, et al. (2007) First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision repair and severe developmental failure.
213) Inbar-Rozensal D, Castiel A, Visochek L, Castel D, Dantzer F, et al. (2009) A selective eradication of human nonhereditary breast cancer cells by phenanthridine-derived polyADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors.
216) Zaremba T, Ketzer P, Cole M, Coulthard S, Plummer ER, et al. (2009) Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 polymorphisms, expression and activity in selected human tumour cell lines.
217) Bhagwat NR, Roginskaya VY, Acquafondata MB, Dhir R, Wood RD, et al. (2009) Immunodetection of DNA repair endonuclease ERCC1-XPF in human tissue.
218) As a control for cisplatin-resistant cells, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell line MCF10A.
219) However, while in the somatic tumor cell line U2OS γH2AX signal quickly decreased and returned nearly to control level by 72 hs, even in relatively cisplatin resistant EC cell lines (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1), γH2AX reduction was much less efficient (Fig. 1B and H, and Fig. S1 I–K).
220) As controls, we used three human fibroblast cell lines, one with significantly reduced expression of ERCC1 (165TOR) [29], one lacking XPF (XP2YO) [30] and a XP2YO cell line complemented with XPF (XP-F) [31].
221) As a control, the assay was also performed in a cell line (Tera-1) in which cisplatin-induced RAD51 focus assembly was low.
223) U2OS and EC cells were transiently transfected (Amaxa Biotechnology) with 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of I-SceI expressing vector or 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of control plasmids (pCAGGS).
226) Moynahan ME, Chiu JW, Koller BH, Jasin M (1999) BRCA1 controls homology-directed DNA repair.
228) Herein, we have examined the proficiency of five embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell lines to repair cisplatin-induced ICLs.
231) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
232) However, overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF in TGCT cell lines elicits only a small increase in their ICL-repair proficiency and resistance to cisplatin [10].
234) Our results indicate that all EC cell lines are sensitive to AZD2281 monotherapy at clinically relevant concentrations and that inhibition of PARP activity significantly enhances cisplatin cytotoxicity especially in cell lines relatively resistant to the drug.
235) These findings suggest that PARP inhibitors are a potential novel candidates for targeted treatment of ECs and TGCTs otherwise resistant to standard therapies.Go to:ResultsEmbryonal Carcinoma (EC) Cell Lines Exhibit Differential Sensitivities to CisplatinTo determine the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin, we analyzed their ability to survive drug treatment by colony-forming assays (Fig. 1A).
237) As a control for cisplatin-resistant cells, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell line MCF10A.
240) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
241) To analyze whether cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cell lines relies on reduced ability to repair DNA damage, we used Flow cytometry (FACS) analysis to monitor over time, the percent of cells that are γH2AX-positive, following a pulse-exposure to cisplatin (Fig. 1B).
243) However, while in the somatic tumor cell line U2OS γH2AX signal quickly decreased and returned nearly to control level by 72 hs, even in relatively cisplatin resistant EC cell lines (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1), γH2AX reduction was much less efficient (Fig. 1B and H, and Fig. S1 I–K).
245) Furthermore, the most cisplatin-sensitive cell lines NCCIT and NT2D1 were even more defective in ICL repair such that the γH2AX signal increased over time after treatment (Fig. 1B and I and Fig. S1L), and a significant fraction of sub-G1 population arose (Fig. 1C).
246) These results indicate that in EC cell lines, cisplatin sensitivity correlates with cellular proficiency to repair the ICL damage.
247) Importantly, in all cell lines, the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage (Fig. 1B, t = 6 h) was similar, suggesting that under our experimental conditions, cell lines are not significantly different from each other in drug uptake, efflux or detoxification [28].Reduced Proficiency of ECs to Repair ICL-induced Damage is Mechanistically Distinct from their Apoptotic EliminationIt has been recently proposed that the inability of the NT2D1 cell line to repair cisplatin-induced damage is due to rapid and massive induction of apoptosis that precedes the onset of DNA damage-repair [8].
249) Thus the different kinetic of repair is not linked to different timing of cell cycle arrest.Figure 2Figure 2The inability of NT2D1 cell line to repair ICL-induced DSBs, is not rescued by preventing their apoptotic response.Reduced Expression of NER-repair Factors does not Fully Account for the Differential Sensitivity of EC Cells to CisplatinThe reduced expression of NER-proteins XPF and ERCC1 has been proposed to explain TGCT sensitivity to DNA damaging agents [9], [10].
250) As controls, we used three human fibroblast cell lines, one with significantly reduced expression of ERCC1 (165TOR) [29], one lacking XPF (XP2YO) [30] and a XP2YO cell line complemented with XPF (XP-F) [31].
251) Similar to a previous report [9], TGCT cell lines had somewhat reduced ERCC1 expression compared to U2OS (Fig. 3A and C); however, XPF protein levels were not obviously reduced in most cell lines (Fig. 3B and D).
252) However, within EC cell lines, we did not observe a correlation between cisplatin resistance and ERCC1 expression levels.
253) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
254) Since HR repair occurs during genome replication, we tested whether the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin was due to defective HR-repair by quantifying the number of RAD51 foci in S-phase.
256) In addition, sensitivity to cisplatin correlated with the level of S phase RAD51 foci; such that the most cisplatin-sensitive cell line, NT2D1, was the most defective in RAD51 foci assembly.
258) As a control, the assay was also performed in a cell line (Tera-1) in which cisplatin-induced RAD51 focus assembly was low.
260) These data demonstrate that EC cell lines have a reduced proficiency in HR.Figure 4Figure 4ECs are defective in HR repair.To understand whether the defect in the assembly of RAD51 foci observed in most EC cell lines was the consequence of reduced expression of the protein, we performed a western blot analysis.
261) RAD51 was similarly expressed in U2OS as in EC cell lines (Fig. 5A top panel, and Fig. 5B), indicating that a functional deficiency in formation of RAD51 foci rather than differential expression of this protein may cause an the HR defect.
262) Because PTEN expression was reported to be virtually absent in 86% of ECs [37], we analyzed protein expression in our EC cell lines.
263) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
264) Therefore, we analyzed BRCA1 protein expression in EC cell lines as compared to HR-proficient U2OS.
265) As shown in Fig. 5D–E, BRCA1 expression was reduced, with respect to U2OS, in Tera-1 and NT2D1 cell lines, but not in 27x-1 and 2102Ep, and not significantly in NCCIT.
266) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
273) In most EC cell lines (but not in MCF10A), AZD2281 treatment, was accompanied by a prominent increase in damage in G2 (Fig. 6G–H and Fig. S4I–L), with delay in the S/G2 phases of the cell cycle (Fig. 6C–F, and S4 A–H), indicating that the sensitization effect required passage through replication, a cell cycle stage when HR is more effective.Sensitivity of ECs to AZD2281 Correlates with PARP1 Protein Expression and ActivityPARP is frequently hyper-activated in HR-defective cells, and reversion mutations that rescue HR defects also reduce PARP activity [48].
274) We asked whether sensitivity of EC cell lines to AZD2281 correlates with PARP1 protein expression and activity.
276) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
277) Since we found ECs have a reduced proficiency in HR repair, we tested their sensitivity to combined therapy, exposing them to a pulse (6 hs) of increasing doses of cisplatin in continuous presence of AZD2281 (given at the half IC50 dose for each cell line).
280) Importantly the effect of the combined treatment was more marked in relatively cisplatin-resistant EC cells (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1) than in the most cisplatin-sensitive (NCCIT, NT2D1) such that the IC50 value for cisplatin, was reduced of 2–3-fold in NCCIT and NT2D1, and about 10-fold in 27x-1, 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Table 1).Figure 8Figure 8AZD2281 treatment enhances EC cell lines response to cisplatin.Table 1Table 1Summary table indicating the IC50 value (µM) for AZD2281 (left column) and cisplatin, in absence (mid-column) or in presence (right column) of AZD2281.To gain further insight about the mechanism of EC-response to the combined treatment we analyzed the ability of cell lines to repair DNA damage using γH2AX as marker.
284) This observation suggests that ECs can have or acquire molecular characteristic that render them more resistant to treatment, increasing the risk of incomplete response and tumor relapse.Why are EC cells generally more sensitive to DNA damaging agents than somatic tumors and why are some EC cell lines more sensitive to cisplatin than others?
285) We observed that the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage measured by γH2AX staining (Fig. 1B [t = 6 hs] and Fig. 4D), is not significantly different in EC cell lines compared to the somatic tumor cell line U2OS; indicating that the superior responsiveness of EC cells to cisplatin is not attributable to upstream events that regulate cisplatin damage to DNA.TRP53 is intimately involved in the induction of apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and resistance to therapy following DNA damage.
286) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
287) Usanova observed that the overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF could partially reverse the cisplatin-sensitivity of TGCT cell lines [10], suggesting that a reduced proficiency in ICL-repair, induced by the low expression of these factors, in EC cells might promote cisplatin sensitivity [9].
288) However, since U2OS can be up to 27-fold more resistant than ECs to cisplatin (Fig. 1A), this difference is unlikely to fully account for the platinum-sensitivity of EC cell lines, suggesting that additional mechanisms of ICL-repair might be defective.
289) In addition, among EC cell lines, there was no correlation between levels of ERCC1 expression and cell sensitivity to DNA damage.Because the ability of cycling cells to repair ICLs requires HR [15], [17], we hypothesized that EC cells may be defective in this pathway.
290) The EC cell line 27x-1 which is equally sensitive to cisplatin as 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Fig. 1A) was not defective in this assay, but was equally defective as Tera-1 cells in repair of ISce-I induced DSBs (Fig. 4E and Fig. S3B).
291) These results suggest that perhaps 27x-1 cells are defective in a step downstream of RAD51 foci formation, and more in general that ECs are functionally defective in HR-repair, as also suggested by the similar expression of RAD51 in all cell lines (Fig. 5A–B).
296) In addition, the observation that AZD2281 enhances cisplatin sensitivity in relatively-resistant EC cells, suggests that PARP inhibitors might be used to implement TGCT therapy, especially in patients resistant to standard therapies.Go to:Materials and MethodsCell Lines and CulturingU2OS and TGCT cell lines were cultured in DMEM 15% FCS plus antibiotics (Lonza).
303) At the end of treatment, cells were fixed in methanol, and stained with Giemsa 20% (Sigma Aldrich) for quantification of the number of colonies.Flow Cytometric (FACS) Quantification of Phospho-H2AX (Ser139)Approximately 500×103 cells either treated or untreated with cisplatin, and/or AZD2281, were collected, fixed in cold 70% ethanol, washed in Tris-buffered saline pH 7.4 (TBS) and rehydrated for 10 min at room temperature in TBS with 4% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 (TST).
304) PARP activity was expressed as pmol of 32P-NAD+/mg of protein.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Cell cycle distribution and mean percentage of γH2AX positive cells in G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle in exponential phase populations of U2OS and EC cell lines treated (or untreated) with cisplatin.
305) The indicated cell lines were treated as described above, collected at the indicated time points after treatment, and stained with the anti-γH2AX antibody for FACS analysis.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(974K, tif)Figure S2DNA double strand breaks after cisplatin treatment occurs in S/G2 phases of the cell cycle.
315) All cell lines but NCCIT (not shown) are wild-type for TRP53, as shown by the increase of both p53 and p21 proteins level upon cisplatin treatment.
318) 27x-1 cell line is also wild type for p53, as shown by p53 (and p21) up-regulation upon cisplatin treatment (see Fig. S6).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(140K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe thank Prof. Claudio Sette, Prof. Raffaele Geremia (University of Rome Tor Vergata) and Dr. Monica Di Giacomo (European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Monterotondo, Rome, Italy) for the helpful discussion and critical reading of the manuscript.
320) Welsh C, Day R, McGurk C, Masters JR, Wood RD, et al. (2004) Reduced levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins in testis tumor cell lines.
321) Damjanov I, Horvat B, Gibas Z (1993) Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of the developmentally pluripotent human germ cell tumor-derived cell line, NCCIT.
323) Zaremba T, Ketzer P, Cole M, Coulthard S, Plummer ER, et al. (2009) Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 polymorphisms, expression and activity in selected human tumour cell lines.
326) Understanding the mechanisms underlying TGCT sensitivity/resistance to cisplatin as well as the identification of novel strategies to target cisplatin-resistant TGCTs have major clinical implications.
327) Herein, we have examined the proficiency of five embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell lines to repair cisplatin-induced ICLs.
329) These results point to a reduced proficiency of HR repair as a source of sensitivity of ECs to ICL-inducing agents and PARP inhibitor monotherapy, and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of PARP can be exploited to target the stem cell component of the TGCTs (namely ECs) and to enhance the sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant TGCTs to standard treatments.Go to:IntroductionTesticular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) develop from pre-malignant intratubular germ cell neoplasia and are histologically distinguished in seminomas and nonseminomas.
333) Therefore, the development of new therapeutic strategies to target ECs, and platinum-resistant TGCTs represents a clinical priority.The underlying biological mechanism(s) responsible for the cisplatin sensitivity/resistance of TGCTs remains unknown.
334) Another attractive hypothesis is that TGCTs display a reduced capacity to repair cisplatin-induced DNA damage [1], [9], [10].Cisplatin causes multiple types of DNA damage, such as mono-adducts, intrastrand crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and interstrand crosslinks (ICLs).
336) DNA repair mechanisms play a pivotal role in cellular tolerance to cisplatin by bypassing or removing ICLs.
337) However, overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF in TGCT cell lines elicits only a small increase in their ICL-repair proficiency and resistance to cisplatin [10].
338) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
339) The cytotoxicity of PARP inhibitors has been postulated to result from an increased number of double strand breaks in cells that can poorly repair them [18], [19] and/or from dysregulation of the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway [20].In this report, we show that the cisplatin-sensitivity of ECs is due to their inability to repair ICL-induced damage.
341) Our results indicate that all EC cell lines are sensitive to AZD2281 monotherapy at clinically relevant concentrations and that inhibition of PARP activity significantly enhances cisplatin cytotoxicity especially in cell lines relatively resistant to the drug.
342) These findings suggest that PARP inhibitors are a potential novel candidates for targeted treatment of ECs and TGCTs otherwise resistant to standard therapies.Go to:ResultsEmbryonal Carcinoma (EC) Cell Lines Exhibit Differential Sensitivities to CisplatinTo determine the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin, we analyzed their ability to survive drug treatment by colony-forming assays (Fig. 1A).
343) As a control for cisplatin-resistant cells, we used the human osteosarcoma cell line U2OS and the non-tumorigenic epithelial cell line MCF10A.
345) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
346) To analyze whether cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cell lines relies on reduced ability to repair DNA damage, we used Flow cytometry (FACS) analysis to monitor over time, the percent of cells that are γH2AX-positive, following a pulse-exposure to cisplatin (Fig. 1B).
348) However, while in the somatic tumor cell line U2OS γH2AX signal quickly decreased and returned nearly to control level by 72 hs, even in relatively cisplatin resistant EC cell lines (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1), γH2AX reduction was much less efficient (Fig. 1B and H, and Fig. S1 I–K).
349) Furthermore, the most cisplatin-sensitive cell lines NCCIT and NT2D1 were even more defective in ICL repair such that the γH2AX signal increased over time after treatment (Fig. 1B and I and Fig. S1L), and a significant fraction of sub-G1 population arose (Fig. 1C).
350) These results indicate that in EC cell lines, cisplatin sensitivity correlates with cellular proficiency to repair the ICL damage.
351) Importantly, in all cell lines, the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage (Fig. 1B, t = 6 h) was similar, suggesting that under our experimental conditions, cell lines are not significantly different from each other in drug uptake, efflux or detoxification [28].Reduced Proficiency of ECs to Repair ICL-induced Damage is Mechanistically Distinct from their Apoptotic EliminationIt has been recently proposed that the inability of the NT2D1 cell line to repair cisplatin-induced damage is due to rapid and massive induction of apoptosis that precedes the onset of DNA damage-repair [8].
355) Because XPF and ERCC1 act as heterodimer, reduced expression in ERCC1 might drive the reduction in ICL-repair proficiency, promoting sensitivity of ECs to cisplatin.
356) However, within EC cell lines, we did not observe a correlation between cisplatin resistance and ERCC1 expression levels.
357) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
358) Since HR repair occurs during genome replication, we tested whether the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin was due to defective HR-repair by quantifying the number of RAD51 foci in S-phase.
360) In addition, sensitivity to cisplatin correlated with the level of S phase RAD51 foci; such that the most cisplatin-sensitive cell line, NT2D1, was the most defective in RAD51 foci assembly.
362) As a control, the assay was also performed in a cell line (Tera-1) in which cisplatin-induced RAD51 focus assembly was low.
364) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
367) Since we found ECs have a reduced proficiency in HR repair, we tested their sensitivity to combined therapy, exposing them to a pulse (6 hs) of increasing doses of cisplatin in continuous presence of AZD2281 (given at the half IC50 dose for each cell line).
370) Importantly the effect of the combined treatment was more marked in relatively cisplatin-resistant EC cells (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1) than in the most cisplatin-sensitive (NCCIT, NT2D1) such that the IC50 value for cisplatin, was reduced of 2–3-fold in NCCIT and NT2D1, and about 10-fold in 27x-1, 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Table 1).Figure 8Figure 8AZD2281 treatment enhances EC cell lines response to cisplatin.Table 1Table 1Summary table indicating the IC50 value (µM) for AZD2281 (left column) and cisplatin, in absence (mid-column) or in presence (right column) of AZD2281.To gain further insight about the mechanism of EC-response to the combined treatment we analyzed the ability of cell lines to repair DNA damage using γH2AX as marker.
371) As result, the percentage of apoptotic cell death as measured 72 hs after the beginning of treatment was increased with respect to either cisplatin or AZD2281 monotherapy treatments (Fig. 8C), validating the effect of the combined therapy.Go to:DiscussionEmbryonal carcinomas (ECs) are considered the stem cell component of nonseminomatous TGCTs and, as cancer stem cells, maintain self-renewal capacity and are often multipotent.
374) This observation suggests that ECs can have or acquire molecular characteristic that render them more resistant to treatment, increasing the risk of incomplete response and tumor relapse.Why are EC cells generally more sensitive to DNA damaging agents than somatic tumors and why are some EC cell lines more sensitive to cisplatin than others?
375) We observed that the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage measured by γH2AX staining (Fig. 1B [t = 6 hs] and Fig. 4D), is not significantly different in EC cell lines compared to the somatic tumor cell line U2OS; indicating that the superior responsiveness of EC cells to cisplatin is not attributable to upstream events that regulate cisplatin damage to DNA.TRP53 is intimately involved in the induction of apoptosis, cell cycle arrest and resistance to therapy following DNA damage.
378) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
380) The observation that co-treatment of cells relatively resistant to cisplatin with cisplatin and AZD2281 causes a defect in repair of ICLs (persistent damage) and reduces their ability to form colonies (Fig. 8), supports this conclusion.Which defect in DNA damage repair is most critical to cisplatin sensitivity in EC cells?
381) Usanova observed that the overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF could partially reverse the cisplatin-sensitivity of TGCT cell lines [10], suggesting that a reduced proficiency in ICL-repair, induced by the low expression of these factors, in EC cells might promote cisplatin sensitivity [9].
382) However, since U2OS can be up to 27-fold more resistant than ECs to cisplatin (Fig. 1A), this difference is unlikely to fully account for the platinum-sensitivity of EC cell lines, suggesting that additional mechanisms of ICL-repair might be defective.
383) The EC cell line 27x-1 which is equally sensitive to cisplatin as 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Fig. 1A) was not defective in this assay, but was equally defective as Tera-1 cells in repair of ISce-I induced DSBs (Fig. 4E and Fig. S3B).
384) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
387) In addition, the observation that AZD2281 enhances cisplatin sensitivity in relatively-resistant EC cells, suggests that PARP inhibitors might be used to implement TGCT therapy, especially in patients resistant to standard therapies.Go to:Materials and MethodsCell Lines and CulturingU2OS and TGCT cell lines were cultured in DMEM 15% FCS plus antibiotics (Lonza).
388) At the end of treatment, cells were fixed in methanol, and stained with Giemsa 20% (Sigma Aldrich) for quantification of the number of colonies.Flow Cytometric (FACS) Quantification of Phospho-H2AX (Ser139)Approximately 500×103 cells either treated or untreated with cisplatin, and/or AZD2281, were collected, fixed in cold 70% ethanol, washed in Tris-buffered saline pH 7.4 (TBS) and rehydrated for 10 min at room temperature in TBS with 4% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 (TST).
390) PARP activity was expressed as pmol of 32P-NAD+/mg of protein.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Cell cycle distribution and mean percentage of γH2AX positive cells in G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle in exponential phase populations of U2OS and EC cell lines treated (or untreated) with cisplatin.
396) The indicated cell lines were treated as described above, collected at the indicated time points after treatment, and stained with the anti-γH2AX antibody for FACS analysis.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(974K, tif)Figure S2DNA double strand breaks after cisplatin treatment occurs in S/G2 phases of the cell cycle.
407) All cell lines but NCCIT (not shown) are wild-type for TRP53, as shown by the increase of both p53 and p21 proteins level upon cisplatin treatment.
408) 27x-1 cell line is also wild type for p53, as shown by p53 (and p21) up-regulation upon cisplatin treatment (see Fig. S6).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(140K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe thank Prof. Claudio Sette, Prof. Raffaele Geremia (University of Rome Tor Vergata) and Dr. Monica Di Giacomo (European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Monterotondo, Rome, Italy) for the helpful discussion and critical reading of the manuscript.
412) Understanding the mechanisms underlying TGCT sensitivity/resistance to cisplatin as well as the identification of novel strategies to target cisplatin-resistant TGCTs have major clinical implications.
419) Therefore, the development of new therapeutic strategies to target ECs, and platinum-resistant TGCTs represents a clinical priority.The underlying biological mechanism(s) responsible for the cisplatin sensitivity/resistance of TGCTs remains unknown.
421) DNA repair mechanisms play a pivotal role in cellular tolerance to cisplatin by bypassing or removing ICLs.
422) The latter requires several classes of proteins including the nucleotide excision repair (NER) proteins XPF-ERCC1, translesion DNA-polymerases, Fanconi anemia gene products [12], [13], [14], and homologous recombination repair (HR) factors [15].
423) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
424) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
426) Our results indicate that all EC cell lines are sensitive to AZD2281 monotherapy at clinically relevant concentrations and that inhibition of PARP activity significantly enhances cisplatin cytotoxicity especially in cell lines relatively resistant to the drug.
427) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
429) However, while in the somatic tumor cell line U2OS γH2AX signal quickly decreased and returned nearly to control level by 72 hs, even in relatively cisplatin resistant EC cell lines (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1), γH2AX reduction was much less efficient (Fig. 1B and H, and Fig. S1 I–K).
430) Furthermore, the most cisplatin-sensitive cell lines NCCIT and NT2D1 were even more defective in ICL repair such that the γH2AX signal increased over time after treatment (Fig. 1B and I and Fig. S1L), and a significant fraction of sub-G1 population arose (Fig. 1C).
431) Importantly, in all cell lines, the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage (Fig. 1B, t = 6 h) was similar, suggesting that under our experimental conditions, cell lines are not significantly different from each other in drug uptake, efflux or detoxification [28].Reduced Proficiency of ECs to Repair ICL-induced Damage is Mechanistically Distinct from their Apoptotic EliminationIt has been recently proposed that the inability of the NT2D1 cell line to repair cisplatin-induced damage is due to rapid and massive induction of apoptosis that precedes the onset of DNA damage-repair [8].
433) Because XPF and ERCC1 act as heterodimer, reduced expression in ERCC1 might drive the reduction in ICL-repair proficiency, promoting sensitivity of ECs to cisplatin.
434) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
435) Since HR repair occurs during genome replication, we tested whether the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin was due to defective HR-repair by quantifying the number of RAD51 foci in S-phase.
437) In addition, sensitivity to cisplatin correlated with the level of S phase RAD51 foci; such that the most cisplatin-sensitive cell line, NT2D1, was the most defective in RAD51 foci assembly.
440) In this assay, repair of DSB by HR results in reconstitution of a functional GFP gene such that HR-proficiency can be quantified by FACS analysis [35] (Fig.S3A).
442) These data demonstrate that EC cell lines have a reduced proficiency in HR.Figure 4Figure 4ECs are defective in HR repair.To understand whether the defect in the assembly of RAD51 foci observed in most EC cell lines was the consequence of reduced expression of the protein, we performed a western blot analysis.
443) RAD51 was similarly expressed in U2OS as in EC cell lines (Fig. 5A top panel, and Fig. 5B), indicating that a functional deficiency in formation of RAD51 foci rather than differential expression of this protein may cause an the HR defect.
445) Because PTEN expression was reported to be virtually absent in 86% of ECs [37], we analyzed protein expression in our EC cell lines.
446) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
447) As shown in Fig. 5D–E, BRCA1 expression was reduced, with respect to U2OS, in Tera-1 and NT2D1 cell lines, but not in 27x-1 and 2102Ep, and not significantly in NCCIT.
448) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
450) Recent evidence indicates that the treatment of U2OS with the PARP inhibitor PHEN down-regulates BRCA1/RAD51 expression causing a defect in HR [45].
453) In most EC cell lines (but not in MCF10A), AZD2281 treatment, was accompanied by a prominent increase in damage in G2 (Fig. 6G–H and Fig. S4I–L), with delay in the S/G2 phases of the cell cycle (Fig. 6C–F, and S4 A–H), indicating that the sensitization effect required passage through replication, a cell cycle stage when HR is more effective.Sensitivity of ECs to AZD2281 Correlates with PARP1 Protein Expression and ActivityPARP is frequently hyper-activated in HR-defective cells, and reversion mutations that rescue HR defects also reduce PARP activity [48].
457) Importantly the effect of the combined treatment was more marked in relatively cisplatin-resistant EC cells (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1) than in the most cisplatin-sensitive (NCCIT, NT2D1) such that the IC50 value for cisplatin, was reduced of 2–3-fold in NCCIT and NT2D1, and about 10-fold in 27x-1, 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Table 1).Figure 8Figure 8AZD2281 treatment enhances EC cell lines response to cisplatin.Table 1Table 1Summary table indicating the IC50 value (µM) for AZD2281 (left column) and cisplatin, in absence (mid-column) or in presence (right column) of AZD2281.To gain further insight about the mechanism of EC-response to the combined treatment we analyzed the ability of cell lines to repair DNA damage using γH2AX as marker.
458) As result, the percentage of apoptotic cell death as measured 72 hs after the beginning of treatment was increased with respect to either cisplatin or AZD2281 monotherapy treatments (Fig. 8C), validating the effect of the combined therapy.Go to:DiscussionEmbryonal carcinomas (ECs) are considered the stem cell component of nonseminomatous TGCTs and, as cancer stem cells, maintain self-renewal capacity and are often multipotent.
462) This observation suggests that ECs can have or acquire molecular characteristic that render them more resistant to treatment, increasing the risk of incomplete response and tumor relapse.Why are EC cells generally more sensitive to DNA damaging agents than somatic tumors and why are some EC cell lines more sensitive to cisplatin than others?
463) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
467) The observation that co-treatment of cells relatively resistant to cisplatin with cisplatin and AZD2281 causes a defect in repair of ICLs (persistent damage) and reduces their ability to form colonies (Fig. 8), supports this conclusion.Which defect in DNA damage repair is most critical to cisplatin sensitivity in EC cells?
468) However, since U2OS can be up to 27-fold more resistant than ECs to cisplatin (Fig. 1A), this difference is unlikely to fully account for the platinum-sensitivity of EC cell lines, suggesting that additional mechanisms of ICL-repair might be defective.
469) In addition, among EC cell lines, there was no correlation between levels of ERCC1 expression and cell sensitivity to DNA damage.Because the ability of cycling cells to repair ICLs requires HR [15], [17], we hypothesized that EC cells may be defective in this pathway.
471) The EC cell line 27x-1 which is equally sensitive to cisplatin as 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Fig. 1A) was not defective in this assay, but was equally defective as Tera-1 cells in repair of ISce-I induced DSBs (Fig. 4E and Fig. S3B).
472) These results suggest that perhaps 27x-1 cells are defective in a step downstream of RAD51 foci formation, and more in general that ECs are functionally defective in HR-repair, as also suggested by the similar expression of RAD51 in all cell lines (Fig. 5A–B).
474) Their identification will likely require high throughput studies to globally examine the gene expression signature that distinguishes TGCT cells from other solid tumor cells that display lower sensitivity to cisplatin treatment.HR-deficient tumors can be specifically targeted by treatment with PARP inhibitors [18], [19].
477) In addition, the observation that PARP-inducible activity is higher in the most PARP inhibitor-sensitive EC cells (Fig. 7A) suggest that in these tumors PARP activation might be required to compensate for the HR defect.
481) In addition, the observation that AZD2281 enhances cisplatin sensitivity in relatively-resistant EC cells, suggests that PARP inhibitors might be used to implement TGCT therapy, especially in patients resistant to standard therapies.Go to:Materials and MethodsCell Lines and CulturingU2OS and TGCT cell lines were cultured in DMEM 15% FCS plus antibiotics (Lonza).
483) At the end of treatment, cells were fixed in methanol, and stained with Giemsa 20% (Sigma Aldrich) for quantification of the number of colonies.Flow Cytometric (FACS) Quantification of Phospho-H2AX (Ser139)Approximately 500×103 cells either treated or untreated with cisplatin, and/or AZD2281, were collected, fixed in cold 70% ethanol, washed in Tris-buffered saline pH 7.4 (TBS) and rehydrated for 10 min at room temperature in TBS with 4% BSA and 0.1% Triton X-100 (TST).
490) All images were acquired at 100x magnification.DSB AssaysDSB repair was measured by using a GFP-based assay for HR as described previously [35] In brief, efficiency of HR was assessed by co-transfecting an I-SceI expression plasmid (pCBASce) with a GFP-reporter substrate (DR-GFP).
491) U2OS and EC cells were transiently transfected (Amaxa Biotechnology) with 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of I-SceI expressing vector or 1 µg of DR-GFP plus 3 µg of control plasmids (pCAGGS).
494) After 15 minutes at 30°C the reaction was stopped by addition of ice-cold trichloroacetic acid 20% (v/v) and the radioactivity associated with the acid-insoluble material, corresponding to poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated proteins, was counted on a Beckman LS8100 liquid scintillation counter.
496) The indicated cell lines were treated as described above, collected at the indicated time points after treatment, and stained with the anti-γH2AX antibody for FACS analysis.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(974K, tif)Figure S2DNA double strand breaks after cisplatin treatment occurs in S/G2 phases of the cell cycle.
508) 27x-1 cell line is also wild type for p53, as shown by p53 (and p21) up-regulation upon cisplatin treatment (see Fig. S6).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(140K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe thank Prof. Claudio Sette, Prof. Raffaele Geremia (University of Rome Tor Vergata) and Dr. Monica Di Giacomo (European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Monterotondo, Rome, Italy) for the helpful discussion and critical reading of the manuscript.
510) Pont J, Holtl W, Kosak D, Machacek E, Kienzer H, et al. (1990) Risk-adapted treatment choice in stage I nonseminomatous testicular germ cell cancer by regarding vascular invasion in the primary tumor: a prospective trial.
520) Jaspers NG, Raams A, Silengo MC, Wijgers N, Niedernhofer LJ, et al. (2007) First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision repair and severe developmental failure.
522) Moynahan ME, Jasin M (2010) Mitotic homologous recombination maintains genomic stability and suppresses tumorigenesis.
526) Moynahan ME, Chiu JW, Koller BH, Jasin M (1999) BRCA1 controls homology-directed DNA repair.
529) Inbar-Rozensal D, Castiel A, Visochek L, Castel D, Dantzer F, et al. (2009) A selective eradication of human nonhereditary breast cancer cells by phenanthridine-derived polyADP-ribose polymerase inhibitors.
531) Zaremba T, Ketzer P, Cole M, Coulthard S, Plummer ER, et al. (2009) Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 polymorphisms, expression and activity in selected human tumour cell lines.
532) Bhagwat NR, Roginskaya VY, Acquafondata MB, Dhir R, Wood RD, et al. (2009) Immunodetection of DNA repair endonuclease ERCC1-XPF in human tissue.
533) The magnitude of sensitivity correlated with HR-repair reduced proficiency and with the expression levels and activity of PARP1 protein.
534) Another attractive hypothesis is that TGCTs display a reduced capacity to repair cisplatin-induced DNA damage [1], [9], [10].Cisplatin causes multiple types of DNA damage, such as mono-adducts, intrastrand crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and interstrand crosslinks (ICLs).
535) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
536) Our results indicate that all EC cell lines are sensitive to AZD2281 monotherapy at clinically relevant concentrations and that inhibition of PARP activity significantly enhances cisplatin cytotoxicity especially in cell lines relatively resistant to the drug.
537) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
539) In most EC cell lines (but not in MCF10A), AZD2281 treatment, was accompanied by a prominent increase in damage in G2 (Fig. 6G–H and Fig. S4I–L), with delay in the S/G2 phases of the cell cycle (Fig. 6C–F, and S4 A–H), indicating that the sensitization effect required passage through replication, a cell cycle stage when HR is more effective.Sensitivity of ECs to AZD2281 Correlates with PARP1 Protein Expression and ActivityPARP is frequently hyper-activated in HR-defective cells, and reversion mutations that rescue HR defects also reduce PARP activity [48].
541) We asked whether sensitivity of EC cell lines to AZD2281 correlates with PARP1 protein expression and activity.
542) Using an in vitro assay, we measured the maximal PARP activity (induced by the presence of nuclease-treated DNA) and correlated the results with PARP1 protein expression levels.
544) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
545) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
549) In addition, the observation that PARP-inducible activity is higher in the most PARP inhibitor-sensitive EC cells (Fig. 7A) suggest that in these tumors PARP activation might be required to compensate for the HR defect.
550) Interestingly, PARP1 protein expression correlates with its inducible activity in most EC cells, (Fig. 7B–C) and thus might represent a predictive marker for response to PARP-inhibitors monotherapy in EC cells despite its lack of predictive ability in other tumor models [55].
551) After 15 minutes at 30°C the reaction was stopped by addition of ice-cold trichloroacetic acid 20% (v/v) and the radioactivity associated with the acid-insoluble material, corresponding to poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated proteins, was counted on a Beckman LS8100 liquid scintillation counter.
552) PARP activity was expressed as pmol of 32P-NAD+/mg of protein.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Cell cycle distribution and mean percentage of γH2AX positive cells in G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle in exponential phase populations of U2OS and EC cell lines treated (or untreated) with cisplatin.
554) Zaremba T, Ketzer P, Cole M, Coulthard S, Plummer ER, et al. (2009) Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 polymorphisms, expression and activity in selected human tumour cell lines.
555) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
556) Herein, we have examined the proficiency of five embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell lines to repair cisplatin-induced ICLs.
559) The magnitude of sensitivity correlated with HR-repair reduced proficiency and with the expression levels and activity of PARP1 protein.
560) These results point to a reduced proficiency of HR repair as a source of sensitivity of ECs to ICL-inducing agents and PARP inhibitor monotherapy, and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of PARP can be exploited to target the stem cell component of the TGCTs (namely ECs) and to enhance the sensitivity of cisplatin-resistant TGCTs to standard treatments.Go to:IntroductionTesticular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) develop from pre-malignant intratubular germ cell neoplasia and are histologically distinguished in seminomas and nonseminomas.
561) Another attractive hypothesis is that TGCTs display a reduced capacity to repair cisplatin-induced DNA damage [1], [9], [10].Cisplatin causes multiple types of DNA damage, such as mono-adducts, intrastrand crosslinks, DNA-protein crosslinks and interstrand crosslinks (ICLs).
562) DNA repair mechanisms play a pivotal role in cellular tolerance to cisplatin by bypassing or removing ICLs.
563) The latter requires several classes of proteins including the nucleotide excision repair (NER) proteins XPF-ERCC1, translesion DNA-polymerases, Fanconi anemia gene products [12], [13], [14], and homologous recombination repair (HR) factors [15].
566) Unhooking of the ICL-adduct by XPF-ERCC1 proteins, DNA synthesis (directed by translesion DNA polymerases), and re-establishment of the replication fork integrity by HR, then completes repair of the DNA lesion [15], [17].Analysis of NER protein expression in TGCT-derived cell lines revealed that levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins are reduced with respect to somatic tumors cells, suggesting that impaired NER function might account for TGCT sensitivity to ICL-inducing agents [9].
567) However, overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF in TGCT cell lines elicits only a small increase in their ICL-repair proficiency and resistance to cisplatin [10].
568) Therefore, while NER proteins appear to have a protective role, their deficiency does not fully explain the unique sensitivity of TGCTs to cisplatin and suggests that additional defects in ICL repair might be of critical significance.Homologous recombination (HR) is an attractive candidate based on its importance for ICL repair; HR is frequently dysregulated in a variety of tymor types and HR deficiency is involved in the susceptibility of cancer cells to poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors.
569) The cytotoxicity of PARP inhibitors has been postulated to result from an increased number of double strand breaks in cells that can poorly repair them [18], [19] and/or from dysregulation of the non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) pathway [20].In this report, we show that the cisplatin-sensitivity of ECs is due to their inability to repair ICL-induced damage.
571) These results indicate that, although they appear more sensitive to cisplatin than somatic tumor (and non-tumor) cells, EC cell lines differ from each other, suggesting that resistant cells may have acquired specific molecular characteristics that render them less responsive to treatment.Figure 1Figure 1ECs are defective in ICL-induced damage repair.EC Cell Lines are Deficient in ICL-damage RepairThe phosphorylation of histone H2AX on serine 139 (γH2AX) is considered a general marker of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) induced by several chemotherapeutic drugs, including cisplatin [26].
572) To analyze whether cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cell lines relies on reduced ability to repair DNA damage, we used Flow cytometry (FACS) analysis to monitor over time, the percent of cells that are γH2AX-positive, following a pulse-exposure to cisplatin (Fig. 1B).
574) Furthermore, the most cisplatin-sensitive cell lines NCCIT and NT2D1 were even more defective in ICL repair such that the γH2AX signal increased over time after treatment (Fig. 1B and I and Fig. S1L), and a significant fraction of sub-G1 population arose (Fig. 1C).
575) These results indicate that in EC cell lines, cisplatin sensitivity correlates with cellular proficiency to repair the ICL damage.
576) Importantly, in all cell lines, the initial cisplatin-induced DNA damage (Fig. 1B, t = 6 h) was similar, suggesting that under our experimental conditions, cell lines are not significantly different from each other in drug uptake, efflux or detoxification [28].Reduced Proficiency of ECs to Repair ICL-induced Damage is Mechanistically Distinct from their Apoptotic EliminationIt has been recently proposed that the inability of the NT2D1 cell line to repair cisplatin-induced damage is due to rapid and massive induction of apoptosis that precedes the onset of DNA damage-repair [8].
579) Thus the different kinetic of repair is not linked to different timing of cell cycle arrest.Figure 2Figure 2The inability of NT2D1 cell line to repair ICL-induced DSBs, is not rescued by preventing their apoptotic response.Reduced Expression of NER-repair Factors does not Fully Account for the Differential Sensitivity of EC Cells to CisplatinThe reduced expression of NER-proteins XPF and ERCC1 has been proposed to explain TGCT sensitivity to DNA damaging agents [9], [10].
580) Because XPF and ERCC1 act as heterodimer, reduced expression in ERCC1 might drive the reduction in ICL-repair proficiency, promoting sensitivity of ECs to cisplatin.
581) Since resolution of ICL damage requires the coordinated action of multiple repair mechanisms [17], this result suggests that the differential cisplatin-sensitivity of EC cells may depend on dysregulation of DNA repair mechanisms other than XPF-ERCC1.Figure 3Figure 3The high sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin correlates with a reduced expression of ERCC1 but not XPF.EC Cell Lines Display a Reduced Proficiency in HRHR is a major pathway for repair of DNA ICLs in mammalian cells [15].
583) Since HR repair occurs during genome replication, we tested whether the sensitivity of EC cell lines to cisplatin was due to defective HR-repair by quantifying the number of RAD51 foci in S-phase.
585) In this assay, repair of DSB by HR results in reconstitution of a functional GFP gene such that HR-proficiency can be quantified by FACS analysis [35] (Fig.S3A).
586) These data demonstrate that EC cell lines have a reduced proficiency in HR.Figure 4Figure 4ECs are defective in HR repair.To understand whether the defect in the assembly of RAD51 foci observed in most EC cell lines was the consequence of reduced expression of the protein, we performed a western blot analysis.
587) As shown in Fig. 5A (mid panel) and quantified in Fig. 5C, PTEN was expressed in all cell lines except NCCIT, indicating that, as also suggested in another tumor model [38], reduced PTEN expression was not the primary cause of the defective RAD51 function.Figure 5Figure 5The reduced expression of RAD51, PTEN or BRCA1, does not account for the reduced proficiency of EC cell lines, in HR-repair.The breast cancer tumor susceptibility gene product BRCA1 has a fundamental role in HR [39], promoting proper RAD51 focus formation, including HR in ICL repair [14],[40].
588) Thus, although BRCA1 down-regulation might contribute to the increased cisplatin-sensitivity of Tera-1 and NT2D1, it does not appear to fully explain the differential response to cisplatin among EC cell lines.ECs are Sensitive to Treatment with the Poly (ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitor AZD2281Preclinical studies have demonstrated that cancer cells with defective HR repair caused by either BRCA1 or BRCA2 inactivating mutations, display exquisite sensitivity to PARP inhibitors [41], [42].
592) In addition, in most cell lines, PARP1 expression correlated with PARP inducible activity (Fig. 7B–C), suggesting that EC cell lines that rely more strongly on PARP activity to repair DNA damage (due to a reduced proficiency of HR) have increased PARP1 protein levels and are most likely to respond to PARP inhibitor monotherapy.Figure 7Figure 7In EC cell lines PARP maximal activity correlates with PARP1 protein expression.AZD2281 Enhances the Sensitivity of TGCT Cell Lines to CisplatinCisplatin and AZD2281 have been shown to cooperate in the treatment of BRCA-1 deficient mammary tumors in vivo [43], and PARP inhibitors enhance cancer cell sensitivity to radiation and alkylating agents [50].
593) Since we found ECs have a reduced proficiency in HR repair, we tested their sensitivity to combined therapy, exposing them to a pulse (6 hs) of increasing doses of cisplatin in continuous presence of AZD2281 (given at the half IC50 dose for each cell line).
594) Importantly the effect of the combined treatment was more marked in relatively cisplatin-resistant EC cells (27x-1, 2102Ep, Tera-1) than in the most cisplatin-sensitive (NCCIT, NT2D1) such that the IC50 value for cisplatin, was reduced of 2–3-fold in NCCIT and NT2D1, and about 10-fold in 27x-1, 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Table 1).Figure 8Figure 8AZD2281 treatment enhances EC cell lines response to cisplatin.Table 1Table 1Summary table indicating the IC50 value (µM) for AZD2281 (left column) and cisplatin, in absence (mid-column) or in presence (right column) of AZD2281.To gain further insight about the mechanism of EC-response to the combined treatment we analyzed the ability of cell lines to repair DNA damage using γH2AX as marker.
596) In addition, as previously reported in other studies [8], neither high constitutive p53 protein levels nor p53 accumulation/activation upon cisplatin treatment correlated with EC cell lines sensitivity, (Fig. S6) suggesting that EC cells possess unknown intrinsic characteristics that make them unique in their response to DNA damage.Recently, Gutekunst and colleagues proposed that the extreme platinum sensitivity of EC cell lines is due to p53 protein level increases, induced either by DNA damage (cisplatin) or by MDM2-inhibitors (Nutlin-3), resulting in a rapid and massive apoptotic response that prevents DNA repair [8].
600) The observation that co-treatment of cells relatively resistant to cisplatin with cisplatin and AZD2281 causes a defect in repair of ICLs (persistent damage) and reduces their ability to form colonies (Fig. 8), supports this conclusion.Which defect in DNA damage repair is most critical to cisplatin sensitivity in EC cells?
601) Usanova observed that the overexpression of ERCC1 and XPF could partially reverse the cisplatin-sensitivity of TGCT cell lines [10], suggesting that a reduced proficiency in ICL-repair, induced by the low expression of these factors, in EC cells might promote cisplatin sensitivity [9].
602) However, since U2OS can be up to 27-fold more resistant than ECs to cisplatin (Fig. 1A), this difference is unlikely to fully account for the platinum-sensitivity of EC cell lines, suggesting that additional mechanisms of ICL-repair might be defective.
603) In addition, among EC cell lines, there was no correlation between levels of ERCC1 expression and cell sensitivity to DNA damage.Because the ability of cycling cells to repair ICLs requires HR [15], [17], we hypothesized that EC cells may be defective in this pathway.
605) The EC cell line 27x-1 which is equally sensitive to cisplatin as 2102Ep and Tera-1 (Fig. 1A) was not defective in this assay, but was equally defective as Tera-1 cells in repair of ISce-I induced DSBs (Fig. 4E and Fig. S3B).
606) These results suggest that perhaps 27x-1 cells are defective in a step downstream of RAD51 foci formation, and more in general that ECs are functionally defective in HR-repair, as also suggested by the similar expression of RAD51 in all cell lines (Fig. 5A–B).
609) All images were acquired at 100x magnification.DSB AssaysDSB repair was measured by using a GFP-based assay for HR as described previously [35] In brief, efficiency of HR was assessed by co-transfecting an I-SceI expression plasmid (pCBASce) with a GFP-reporter substrate (DR-GFP).
610) The assay works through gene conversion repair of a DSB caused by I-SceI digestion; such that the DR-GFP plasmids repaired by HR express GFP (see Fig. S3A).
612) Welsh C, Day R, McGurk C, Masters JR, Wood RD, et al. (2004) Reduced levels of XPA, ERCC1 and XPF DNA repair proteins in testis tumor cell lines.
621) Jaspers NG, Raams A, Silengo MC, Wijgers N, Niedernhofer LJ, et al. (2007) First reported patient with human ERCC1 deficiency has cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome with a mild defect in nucleotide excision repair and severe developmental failure.
625) Moynahan ME, Chiu JW, Koller BH, Jasin M (1999) BRCA1 controls homology-directed DNA repair.
628) Bhagwat NR, Roginskaya VY, Acquafondata MB, Dhir R, Wood RD, et al. (2009) Immunodetection of DNA repair endonuclease ERCC1-XPF in human tissue.
629) Weissman, Yale University, New Haven, CT, and approved August 30, 2012 (received for review August 2, 2012)AbstractFull TextAuthors & InfoFiguresSIMetricsRelated ContentPDFPDF + SI Next SectionAbstractDeregulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression can lead to cancer initiation and progression.
633) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
634) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
635) In the case of miRNAs, withdrawal of ectopic miR-21 is known to cause regression in a mouse model of lymphoma (10), indicating that some established lymphomas may be dependent on miR-21 overexpression.Interestingly, recent studies on p53 demonstrate that the phenotype of oncogene addiction can be dependent on the stage of cancer progression (11, 12).
636) We report a barcode genetic screen with the use of a unique miRNA expression library, which led to the identification of miR-125 miRNAs in inducing hypersensitivity toward cytokine signaling in both cell line and primary bone marrow cells.
638) We constructed a retroviral miRNA expression library, by PCR-amplifying specific miRNA-encoding and flanking regions from human genomic DNA and inserting the amplified fragments into a retroviral vector.
641) BaF3 cells were infected with miR-125a, miR-125b or the control vector, which also expresses a GFP marker.
645) This result demonstrates the effectiveness of the screen to identify relevant MPN-inducing miRNAs, and suggest that miR-125 miRNAs may regulate cytokine signaling in primary cells.Constitutive Overexpression of miR-125a Leads to MPN.
647) To address oncogene addiction in the context of MPN, we first assessed the effects of constitutive miR-125a overexpression in vivo to gauge the phenotypes of an inducible miR-125a model to be described later.
651) We engineered a lentiviral vector (hereafter referred to as “i125a”), with the expression of miR-125a under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter, and with a constitutively expressed GFP marker to label the transduced cells (Fig. 3A).
655) We confirmed that the expression level of miR-125a could be modulated by doxycycline in recipient mice (Fig. S6A).
663) Notably, spleen was also the major site of extramedullary hematopoiesis with constitutive miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 2E and Fig. S3B), with the enlarged spleen supporting red cell production to compensate for ineffective bone marrow erythropoiesis.
668) Although we were not able to assess the endogenous protein level because of the lack of a reliable antibody, we did observe a down-regulation of the endogenous PTPN18 mRNA with miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 5F).
669) This is indeed true, because BaF3 cells and primary bone marrow cells expressing miR-125a showed higher protein tyrosine phosphorylation than corresponding controls (Fig. 5C).
670) Unlike the previously reported case of oncogene addiction to miR-21, which resulted in lymphoma formation in mice (10), overexpression of miR-125a resulted in a neoplasm with excessive expansion of the myeloid lineage, representing an early neoplastic stage.
674) The library of miRNA expression vectors was pooled and used to generate pooled viral mixture for infection.
675) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
676) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
678) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Cheng J, Daimaru L, Fennie C, Lasky LA (1996) A novel protein tyrosine phosphatase expressed in lin(lo)CD34(hi)Sca(hi) hematopoietic progenitor cells.
679) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Huang K, Sommers CL, Grinberg A, Kozak CA, Love PE (1996) Cloning and characterization of PTP-K1, a novel nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase highly expressed in bone marrow.
681) Indeed, oncogene addiction has been demonstrated for a short list of protein-coding genes in vivo [e.g., c-myc, BCR/ABL, Her-2, and p53 (6–7)], many of which are clinically validated therapeutic targets (8, 9).
682) Molecularly, we identify several protein phosphatases as previously unrecognized targets of miR-125a and the associated elevation in cellular tyrosine phosphorylation.
683) 5.miR-125a regulates cytokine hypersensitivity and targets multiple protein phosphatases.
687) Mutation of a putative miR-125 binding site in PTPN18 3′ UTR abolished the targeting by miR-125a (Fig. 5E), demonstrating a direct targeting effect.
689) These findings illustrate the protein phosphatases as a class of common targets by classic hematopoietic oncogenes, such as BCR-ABL (37), and a noncoding small RNA miR-125a.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of miR-125a in an in vivo model of MPN and report the complex nature of dependence on an oncogenic miRNA.
690) We demonstrate that miR-125a targets multiple protein phosphatases, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for the effects on protein phosphorylation and cytokine sensitivity.
692) With a long list of over 800 predicted targets (TargetScan), it is highly likely that cooperation among multiple targets, including protein phosphatases, is responsible for the overall MPN phenotypic manifestation.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsmiRNA Functional Screen.
693) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
695) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Sharma SV, Settleman J (2007) Oncogene addiction: Setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
696) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Chaudhuri AA, et al. (2012) Oncomir miR-125b regulates hematopoiesis by targeting the gene Lin28A.
697) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Le MT, et al. (2011) Conserved regulation of p53 network dosage by microRNA-125b occurs through evolving miRNA-target gene pairs.
699) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
700) In mouse lung cancer models driven by the loss of p53 and mutant k-ras, genetic restoration of p53 leads to significant loss of tumor mass in more advanced tumor cells but not in the earlier, less aggressive ones.
701) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
704) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Voorhoeve PM, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
705) Weissman, Yale University, New Haven, CT, and approved August 30, 2012 (received for review August 2, 2012)AbstractFull TextAuthors & InfoFiguresSIMetricsRelated ContentPDFPDF + SI Next SectionAbstractDeregulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression can lead to cancer initiation and progression.
707) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
708) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
710) A special type of cancer maintenance is related to oncogene dependence/addiction, in which the maintenance of cancer phenotype is dependent on the sustained presence of one of the initial driving genetic lesions, even though cancer cells may have acquired additional mutations.
711) In the case of miRNAs, withdrawal of ectopic miR-21 is known to cause regression in a mouse model of lymphoma (10), indicating that some established lymphomas may be dependent on miR-21 overexpression.Interestingly, recent studies on p53 demonstrate that the phenotype of oncogene addiction can be dependent on the stage of cancer progression (11, 12).
712) In mouse lung cancer models driven by the loss of p53 and mutant k-ras, genetic restoration of p53 leads to significant loss of tumor mass in more advanced tumor cells but not in the earlier, less aggressive ones.
713) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
714) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
717) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Sharma SV, Settleman J (2007) Oncogene addiction: Setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
718) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Feldser DM, et al. (2010) Stage-specific sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression.
721) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
722) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
723) A special type of cancer maintenance is related to oncogene dependence/addiction, in which the maintenance of cancer phenotype is dependent on the sustained presence of one of the initial driving genetic lesions, even though cancer cells may have acquired additional mutations.
724) Indeed, oncogene addiction has been demonstrated for a short list of protein-coding genes in vivo [e.g., c-myc, BCR/ABL, Her-2, and p53 (6–7)], many of which are clinically validated therapeutic targets (8, 9).
725) In the case of miRNAs, withdrawal of ectopic miR-21 is known to cause regression in a mouse model of lymphoma (10), indicating that some established lymphomas may be dependent on miR-21 overexpression.Interestingly, recent studies on p53 demonstrate that the phenotype of oncogene addiction can be dependent on the stage of cancer progression (11, 12).
726) In mouse lung cancer models driven by the loss of p53 and mutant k-ras, genetic restoration of p53 leads to significant loss of tumor mass in more advanced tumor cells but not in the earlier, less aggressive ones.
730) We report a barcode genetic screen with the use of a unique miRNA expression library, which led to the identification of miR-125 miRNAs in inducing hypersensitivity toward cytokine signaling in both cell line and primary bone marrow cells.
731) Our work also implies that profound systemic changes could occur during an early neoplastic disease state and its remission, which then modifies the nature of the lesion upon re-encountering the same oncogene.Previous SectionNext SectionResultsFunctional Genomics Screen Identified miR-125 Family miRNAs as Conferring Reduced Cytokine Dependence.
732) To address oncogene addiction in the context of MPN, we first assessed the effects of constitutive miR-125a overexpression in vivo to gauge the phenotypes of an inducible miR-125a model to be described later.
736) These findings illustrate the protein phosphatases as a class of common targets by classic hematopoietic oncogenes, such as BCR-ABL (37), and a noncoding small RNA miR-125a.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of miR-125a in an in vivo model of MPN and report the complex nature of dependence on an oncogenic miRNA.
737) Unlike the previously reported case of oncogene addiction to miR-21, which resulted in lymphoma formation in mice (10), overexpression of miR-125a resulted in a neoplasm with excessive expansion of the myeloid lineage, representing an early neoplastic stage.
740) The library of miRNA expression vectors was pooled and used to generate pooled viral mixture for infection.
741) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
742) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Sharma SV, Settleman J (2007) Oncogene addiction: Setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
745) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Marcucci G, et al. (2010) IDH1 and IDH2 gene mutations identify novel molecular subsets within de novo cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: A Cancer and Leukemia Group B study.
746) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Chaudhuri AA, et al. (2012) Oncomir miR-125b regulates hematopoiesis by targeting the gene Lin28A.
747) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Le MT, et al. (2011) Conserved regulation of p53 network dosage by microRNA-125b occurs through evolving miRNA-target gene pairs.
750) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Voorhoeve PM, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
753) Notably, spleen was also the major site of extramedullary hematopoiesis with constitutive miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 2E and Fig. S3B), with the enlarged spleen supporting red cell production to compensate for ineffective bone marrow erythropoiesis.
755) Mutation of a putative miR-125 binding site in PTPN18 3′ UTR abolished the targeting by miR-125a (Fig. 5E), demonstrating a direct targeting effect.
756) Weissman, Yale University, New Haven, CT, and approved August 30, 2012 (received for review August 2, 2012)AbstractFull TextAuthors & InfoFiguresSIMetricsRelated ContentPDFPDF + SI Next SectionAbstractDeregulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression can lead to cancer initiation and progression.
757) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
759) This result demonstrates the effectiveness of the screen to identify relevant MPN-inducing miRNAs, and suggest that miR-125 miRNAs may regulate cytokine signaling in primary cells.Constitutive Overexpression of miR-125a Leads to MPN.
761) 5.miR-125a regulates cytokine hypersensitivity and targets multiple protein phosphatases.
763) Although we were not able to assess the endogenous protein level because of the lack of a reliable antibody, we did observe a down-regulation of the endogenous PTPN18 mRNA with miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 5F).
765) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Chaudhuri AA, et al. (2012) Oncomir miR-125b regulates hematopoiesis by targeting the gene Lin28A.
768) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Le MT, et al. (2011) Conserved regulation of p53 network dosage by microRNA-125b occurs through evolving miRNA-target gene pairs.
769) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
771) Indeed, oncogene addiction has been demonstrated for a short list of protein-coding genes in vivo [e.g., c-myc, BCR/ABL, Her-2, and p53 (6–7)], many of which are clinically validated therapeutic targets (8, 9).
772) Molecularly, we identify several protein phosphatases as previously unrecognized targets of miR-125a and the associated elevation in cellular tyrosine phosphorylation.
773) 5.miR-125a regulates cytokine hypersensitivity and targets multiple protein phosphatases.
776) Although we were not able to assess the endogenous protein level because of the lack of a reliable antibody, we did observe a down-regulation of the endogenous PTPN18 mRNA with miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 5F).
778) This is indeed true, because BaF3 cells and primary bone marrow cells expressing miR-125a showed higher protein tyrosine phosphorylation than corresponding controls (Fig. 5C).
779) These findings illustrate the protein phosphatases as a class of common targets by classic hematopoietic oncogenes, such as BCR-ABL (37), and a noncoding small RNA miR-125a.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of miR-125a in an in vivo model of MPN and report the complex nature of dependence on an oncogenic miRNA.
780) We demonstrate that miR-125a targets multiple protein phosphatases, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for the effects on protein phosphorylation and cytokine sensitivity.
781) With a long list of over 800 predicted targets (TargetScan), it is highly likely that cooperation among multiple targets, including protein phosphatases, is responsible for the overall MPN phenotypic manifestation.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsmiRNA Functional Screen.
782) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Cheng J, Daimaru L, Fennie C, Lasky LA (1996) A novel protein tyrosine phosphatase expressed in lin(lo)CD34(hi)Sca(hi) hematopoietic progenitor cells.
784) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Huang K, Sommers CL, Grinberg A, Kozak CA, Love PE (1996) Cloning and characterization of PTP-K1, a novel nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase highly expressed in bone marrow.
786) Mutation of a putative miR-125 binding site in PTPN18 3′ UTR abolished the targeting by miR-125a (Fig. 5E), demonstrating a direct targeting effect.
787) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
788) We constructed a retroviral miRNA expression library, by PCR-amplifying specific miRNA-encoding and flanking regions from human genomic DNA and inserting the amplified fragments into a retroviral vector.
792) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
793) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
796) BaF3 cells were infected with miR-125a, miR-125b or the control vector, which also expresses a GFP marker.
800) We engineered a lentiviral vector (hereafter referred to as “i125a”), with the expression of miR-125a under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter, and with a constitutively expressed GFP marker to label the transduced cells (Fig. 3A).
808) Normalized luciferase activities are shown, with a value of 1 indicating no effect on the 3′ UTR. n = 6 for control, PTPN7, PTPN18, and PPP1R16A; n = 3 for others.
812) This is indeed true, because BaF3 cells and primary bone marrow cells expressing miR-125a showed higher protein tyrosine phosphorylation than corresponding controls (Fig. 5C).
818) We report a barcode genetic screen with the use of a unique miRNA expression library, which led to the identification of miR-125 miRNAs in inducing hypersensitivity toward cytokine signaling in both cell line and primary bone marrow cells.
823) We engineered a lentiviral vector (hereafter referred to as “i125a”), with the expression of miR-125a under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter, and with a constitutively expressed GFP marker to label the transduced cells (Fig. 3A).
824) We confirmed that the expression level of miR-125a could be modulated by doxycycline in recipient mice (Fig. S6A).
829) Unlike the previously reported case of oncogene addiction to miR-21, which resulted in lymphoma formation in mice (10), overexpression of miR-125a resulted in a neoplasm with excessive expansion of the myeloid lineage, representing an early neoplastic stage.
831) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
832) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Volinia S, et al. (2006) A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
836) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Sharma SV, Settleman J (2007) Oncogene addiction: Setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
837) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Feldser DM, et al. (2010) Stage-specific sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression.
838) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Junttila MR, et al. (2010) Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression in high-grade tumours.
847) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Marcucci G, et al. (2010) IDH1 and IDH2 gene mutations identify novel molecular subsets within de novo cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: A Cancer and Leukemia Group B study.
850) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Le MT, et al. (2011) Conserved regulation of p53 network dosage by microRNA-125b occurs through evolving miRNA-target gene pairs.
851) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Cheng J, Daimaru L, Fennie C, Lasky LA (1996) A novel protein tyrosine phosphatase expressed in lin(lo)CD34(hi)Sca(hi) hematopoietic progenitor cells.
852) MedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Sattler M, et al. (2000) The BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase induces production of reactive oxygen species in hematopoietic cells.
856) Weissman, Yale University, New Haven, CT, and approved August 30, 2012 (received for review August 2, 2012)AbstractFull TextAuthors & InfoFiguresSIMetricsRelated ContentPDFPDF + SI Next SectionAbstractDeregulation of microRNA (miRNA) expression can lead to cancer initiation and progression.
859) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
860) A special type of cancer maintenance is related to oncogene dependence/addiction, in which the maintenance of cancer phenotype is dependent on the sustained presence of one of the initial driving genetic lesions, even though cancer cells may have acquired additional mutations.
861) In the case of miRNAs, withdrawal of ectopic miR-21 is known to cause regression in a mouse model of lymphoma (10), indicating that some established lymphomas may be dependent on miR-21 overexpression.Interestingly, recent studies on p53 demonstrate that the phenotype of oncogene addiction can be dependent on the stage of cancer progression (11, 12).
863) Molecularly, we identify several protein phosphatases as previously unrecognized targets of miR-125a and the associated elevation in cellular tyrosine phosphorylation.
864) Our work also implies that profound systemic changes could occur during an early neoplastic disease state and its remission, which then modifies the nature of the lesion upon re-encountering the same oncogene.Previous SectionNext SectionResultsFunctional Genomics Screen Identified miR-125 Family miRNAs as Conferring Reduced Cytokine Dependence.
865) We constructed a retroviral miRNA expression library, by PCR-amplifying specific miRNA-encoding and flanking regions from human genomic DNA and inserting the amplified fragments into a retroviral vector.
871) BaF3 cells were infected with miR-125a, miR-125b or the control vector, which also expresses a GFP marker.
882) This result demonstrates the effectiveness of the screen to identify relevant MPN-inducing miRNAs, and suggest that miR-125 miRNAs may regulate cytokine signaling in primary cells.Constitutive Overexpression of miR-125a Leads to MPN.
884) To address oncogene addiction in the context of MPN, we first assessed the effects of constitutive miR-125a overexpression in vivo to gauge the phenotypes of an inducible miR-125a model to be described later.
904) We engineered a lentiviral vector (hereafter referred to as “i125a”), with the expression of miR-125a under the control of a tetracycline-inducible promoter, and with a constitutively expressed GFP marker to label the transduced cells (Fig. 3A).
909) We confirmed that the expression level of miR-125a could be modulated by doxycycline in recipient mice (Fig. S6A).
925) Notably, spleen was also the major site of extramedullary hematopoiesis with constitutive miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 2E and Fig. S3B), with the enlarged spleen supporting red cell production to compensate for ineffective bone marrow erythropoiesis.
932) Normalized luciferase activities are shown, with a value of 1 indicating no effect on the 3′ UTR. n = 6 for control, PTPN7, PTPN18, and PPP1R16A; n = 3 for others.
933) Mutation of a putative miR-125 binding site in PTPN18 3′ UTR abolished the targeting by miR-125a (Fig. 5E), demonstrating a direct targeting effect.
934) Although we were not able to assess the endogenous protein level because of the lack of a reliable antibody, we did observe a down-regulation of the endogenous PTPN18 mRNA with miR-125a overexpression (Fig. 5F).
935) This is indeed true, because BaF3 cells and primary bone marrow cells expressing miR-125a showed higher protein tyrosine phosphorylation than corresponding controls (Fig. 5C).
936) These findings illustrate the protein phosphatases as a class of common targets by classic hematopoietic oncogenes, such as BCR-ABL (37), and a noncoding small RNA miR-125a.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of miR-125a in an in vivo model of MPN and report the complex nature of dependence on an oncogenic miRNA.
941) We demonstrate that miR-125a targets multiple protein phosphatases, providing a possible mechanistic explanation for the effects on protein phosphorylation and cytokine sensitivity.
943) With a long list of over 800 predicted targets (TargetScan), it is highly likely that cooperation among multiple targets, including protein phosphatases, is responsible for the overall MPN phenotypic manifestation.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsmiRNA Functional Screen.
944) The library of miRNA expression vectors was pooled and used to generate pooled viral mixture for infection.
949) E-mail: jun.lu@yale.edu.Author contributions: S.G., D.S.K., D.T.S., and J.L. designed research; S.G., H.B., C.M.M., and J.L. performed research; S.G., C.M.M., S.H., D.S.K., and J.L. analyzed data; and S.G. and J.L. wrote the paper.The authors declare no conflict of interest.This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.1213196109/-/DCSupplemental.Previous Section References↵ Lu J, et al. (2005) MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
950) CrossRefMedline Search Google Scholar↵ Sharma SV, Settleman J (2007) Oncogene addiction: Setting the stage for molecularly targeted cancer therapy.
951) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Feldser DM, et al. (2010) Stage-specific sensitivity to p53 restoration during lung cancer progression.
952) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Junttila MR, et al. (2010) Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression in high-grade tumours.
953) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Marcucci G, et al. (2010) IDH1 and IDH2 gene mutations identify novel molecular subsets within de novo cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia: A Cancer and Leukemia Group B study.
955) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Huang K, Sommers CL, Grinberg A, Kozak CA, Love PE (1996) Cloning and characterization of PTP-K1, a novel nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase highly expressed in bone marrow.
956) MedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Sattler M, et al. (2000) The BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase induces production of reactive oxygen species in hematopoietic cells.
957) Normalized luciferase activities are shown, with a value of 1 indicating no effect on the 3′ UTR. n = 6 for control, PTPN7, PTPN18, and PPP1R16A; n = 3 for others.
961) CrossRefMedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Junttila MR, et al. (2010) Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression in high-grade tumours.
962) MedlineWeb of Science Search Google Scholar↵ Sattler M, et al. (2000) The BCR/ABL tyrosine kinase induces production of reactive oxygen species in hematopoietic cells.
965) Our data demonstrate that miR-125a–induced MPN is addicted to its sustained overexpression, and highlight the complex nature of oncogenic miRNA dependence in an early neoplastic state.oncogene addiction PTPN18 spleen fibrosisThe expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is frequently deregulated in human cancers (1, 2).
966) Alteration in miRNA gene expression or function can promote cancer initiation and progression in vivo, leading to the recognition that this class of small noncoding RNAs can function as both oncogenes and tumor suppressors (3⇓–5).
967) A special type of cancer maintenance is related to oncogene dependence/addiction, in which the maintenance of cancer phenotype is dependent on the sustained presence of one of the initial driving genetic lesions, even though cancer cells may have acquired additional mutations.
968) Indeed, oncogene addiction has been demonstrated for a short list of protein-coding genes in vivo [e.g., c-myc, BCR/ABL, Her-2, and p53 (6–7)], many of which are clinically validated therapeutic targets (8, 9).
969) In the case of miRNAs, withdrawal of ectopic miR-21 is known to cause regression in a mouse model of lymphoma (10), indicating that some established lymphomas may be dependent on miR-21 overexpression.Interestingly, recent studies on p53 demonstrate that the phenotype of oncogene addiction can be dependent on the stage of cancer progression (11, 12).
975) Our work also implies that profound systemic changes could occur during an early neoplastic disease state and its remission, which then modifies the nature of the lesion upon re-encountering the same oncogene.Previous SectionNext SectionResultsFunctional Genomics Screen Identified miR-125 Family miRNAs as Conferring Reduced Cytokine Dependence.
976) To address oncogene addiction in the context of MPN, we first assessed the effects of constitutive miR-125a overexpression in vivo to gauge the phenotypes of an inducible miR-125a model to be described later.
978) These findings illustrate the protein phosphatases as a class of common targets by classic hematopoietic oncogenes, such as BCR-ABL (37), and a noncoding small RNA miR-125a.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn this study, we examined the role of miR-125a in an in vivo model of MPN and report the complex nature of dependence on an oncogenic miRNA.
979) Unlike the previously reported case of oncogene addiction to miR-21, which resulted in lymphoma formation in mice (10), overexpression of miR-125a resulted in a neoplasm with excessive expansion of the myeloid lineage, representing an early neoplastic stage.
982) Abstract/FREE Full Text↵ Voorhoeve PM, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
983) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
984) They form miRNA-induced silencing complexes (miRISCs) with Argonaute proteins which they guide, through hybridization, to target mRNAs whose expression is subsequently down-regulated (Bushati and Cohen 2007; Bartel 2009).
985) To determine whether the ElMMo-predicted CDS sites are functional we analyzed eight published data sets (listed in Table 1) that compared mRNA expression before and after transfections of individual miRNAs.
987) In principle, these transcripts were expressed and bound by Argonaute proteins, so the transfected miRNAs should have had access to all seed-matching sites in these transcripts.
988) On the other hand, motifs that are complementary to miRNAs with embryonic expression—hsa-miR-302a-3p, hsa-miR-369-3p, hsa-miR-372, hsa-miR-373-3p, hsa-miR-374b/c-5p (Suh et al. 2004), the homologs of which have been shown to be involved in maternal mRNA clearance in zebrafish (Giraldez et al. 2006)—or to the oncogenic miRNAs of the miR-17 family—hsa-miR-17-5p, hsa-miR-20a/b-5p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-106a/b-5p (He et al. 2005)—are more frequent in the 3' UTRs (see also Supplemental Table 1).Figure 2.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 2.Individual miRNAs differ in their preference for targeting the CDS and the 3' UTR as well as in their tendency to simultaneously target the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual genes.
989) Among these were many miRNAs with important functions: the epithelial cell-specific (Gregory et al. 2008) hsa-miR-141-3p/200a-3p (P < 10-11), the embryonic stem cell-expressed (Suh et al. 2004; Stadler et al. 2010) hsa-miR-302/372/373-3p/520a-3p (P < 10-8), the oncogenic component of the mir-17/92 cluster hsa-miR-19a-3p (P < 10-6) (Ventura et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009), the oncogenic hsa-miR-130b-3p/hsa-miR-301a-3p miRNAs (P < 10-6) (Shi et al. 2011), and the hsa-miR-137 (P < 10-6), that is involved in neural maturation (Smrt et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2011).The tendency for these miRNAs to target both the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual mRNAs cannot be explained by a general tendency of motif co-occurrence in the CDS and 3' UTR of the same transcripts because co-targeting enrichments beyond threefold are very rarely observed for random motifs (Supplemental Fig. 11).
990) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
991) The correlation is considerably smaller for sites obtained based on measurement of protein expression changes for reasons that are presently unknown (Hausser et al. 2009).
993) As shown in Supplemental Figure 15, the expression levels of mRNAs with CDS sites change very little upon knockout of miR-223 whereas their translation increases in the absence of the miRNA to a degree comparable to the translation of transcripts with binding sites in 3' UTRs.
994) First, we generated a HEK293T stable cell line containing an episomal pRTS-1 vector from which the expression of hsa-miR-124-3p can be induced with doxycyclin.
996) As shown in Supplemental Figure 17, wild-type constructs exhibit a reduction in protein expression relative to the mutant constructs that cannot be explained by a corresponding decrease in mRNA levels.
997) Recent high-throughput studies concluded that the reduction in protein levels upon miRNA expression is largely a consequence of the mRNA degradation induced by miRNAs (Baek et al. 2008; Selbach et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010), though these initial experiments may have missed an important kinetic aspect (Bazzini et al. 2012).
998) Another recurrent finding is that changes in target mRNA level upon miRNA transfection or overexpression are small.
999) These findings suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites function through similar mechanisms and have a comparable impact on gene expression.Simultaneous measurement of mRNA and protein levels is nontrivial for a variety of reasons.
1000) Furthermore, proteomics measurements require that the proteins are labeled and this imposes constraints on the timing of miRNA transfection (or induction of expression).
1001) Thus, transient expression of the miRNA is probably not an explanation in this case, although it cannot be entirely ruled out because dre-miR-430 may be displaced from the RNA-induced silencing complex by other miRNAs at later time points.Interestingly, in both the zebrafish system and our reporter system, some mRNAs with miRNA binding sites in coding regions appear to be up-regulated upon miRNA expression.
1004) A few examples of crosstalk between RNA-binding proteins and the miRNA pathway have been described (Bhattacharyya et al. 2006; Kedde et al. 2007; Kedde and Agami 2008; Kim et al. 2009) and more are likely to emerge in the future.Finally, different families of miRNAs that are broadly expressed but are active in different contexts show distinct preferences for the CDS or 3' UTR.
1005) On one side of the spectrum are miRNAs expressed in the embryonic cells and miRNAs of the miR-17-92 cluster, that target predominantly 3' UTRs, but also show the strongest enrichment in CDS–3' UTR co-targeting.
1007) For the analysis, we only considered 10,222 genes with nonzero expression levels in all experimental conditions (mock, hsa-miR-155-5p, and hsa-miR-1 transfections/mRNA and rpf sequencing/0, 12, and 32 h after transfection).To investigate the effect of the transfected miRNAs on mRNA stability and translation, we first computed the log2 fold change in rpf and mRNA expression upon miRNA transfection compared with mock transfection.
1009) In case several miRNAs mapped to a binding site, the site was assigned to most highly expressed miRNA.
1010) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1012) By applying the same reasoning to P(ri|r, H0), one can show the denominator of Equation 7 to beFormula(11)Finally, substituting Equations 10 and 11 into Equation 7 gives a simple expression for the posterior probability P(H1|r, ri) that the number of CLIP reads ri mapping to site i is larger than what would be expected given the abundance of the mRNA alone:Formulawhich is the reverse cumulative probability of a Beta distribution.To obtain binding sites, 40-nt windows are ranked by decreasing posterior probability first, and in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment ratios Graphic.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sitesData sets used in the analysisThe microarray and deep-sequencing data for the following references were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accessions GSE6838 and GSE8501 for Linsley et al. (2007), GSE14537 for Hausser et al. (2009), GSE11968 for Baek et al. (2008), GDS1858 for Grimson et al. (2007), GSE22004 for Guo et al. (2010), and GSE28865 for Kishore et al. (2011).
1015) Further assuming that transcripts that do not carry at least a heptameric seed-complementary site are unlikely to be real targets, we estimated µk and sk from the observed expression changes of transcripts without such seed matches.
1016) Not knowing the distribution of the severity of the effect that miRNAs have on the expression of their targets we assumed as little as possible about the distribution Pk(f | +), namely that a true target must change expression in the right direction, i.e., f < 0 for a miRNA overexpression experiment, and that expression changes are limited to a finite range over which the expression change has a “uniform” distribution.
1019) MicroRNAs differentially expressed in postnatal aortic development downregulate elastin via 3' UTR and coding-sequence binding sites.
1021) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1022) In recent years, there has been increasing evidence that miRNAs also bind in the coding region (CDS), but the implication of these interactions remains obscure because they have a smaller impact on mRNA stability compared with miRNA-target interactions that involve 3' UTRs.
1023) Our study suggests that miRNAs may combine targeting of CDS and 3' UTR to flexibly tune the time scale and magnitude of their post-transcriptional regulatory effects.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~21 nt (nucleotide)-long regulatory RNAs that are encoded in the genomes of species ranging from viruses to human.
1024) They form miRNA-induced silencing complexes (miRISCs) with Argonaute proteins which they guide, through hybridization, to target mRNAs whose expression is subsequently down-regulated (Bushati and Cohen 2007; Bartel 2009).
1026) There is growing evidence that plant miRNAs can induce translational repression via imperfect complementarity interactions with target sites in CDS and 3' UTRs (Brodersen et al. 2008; Lanet et al. 2009).
1028) Application of high-throughput approaches for isolating Argonaute-bound target sites indicates that CDS sites are as numerous as those located in 3' UTRs (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), though the density of Argonaute-bound sites is higher in 3' UTR compared with CDS (Hafner et al. 2010).If CDS sites are as common as Argonaute cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies indicate (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), one wonders why there are relatively few reports on their involvement in gene regulation and why the studies that have been so far published suggest that CDS sites are much less effective in down-regulating mRNA levels upon miRNA transfection (Baek et al. 2008; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011; Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1030) For instance, it has recently been found that hsa-miR-181a targets multiple members of the C2H2 zinc finger domain family, through multiple CDS sites that occur precisely in the regions of the transcripts that encode the C2H2 domains (Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1033) Schnall-Levin et al. (2010) allowed for the possibility that sites are not perfectly conserved among “all” genomes used in the inference to show that miRNA targeting in CDS is as common as in the 3' UTRs in Drosophila species.
1034) Finally, Fang and Rajewsky (2011) found evidence that mRNAs that are simultaneously targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR are slightly more destabilized than mRNA targeted only in the 3' UTR, while Schnall-Levin et al. (2011) showed that mRNAs with several miRNA binding sites in the CDS can effectively be degraded.In the present study we analyzed putative miRNA target sites that are located in coding regions, with the aim of uncovering the function of such sites by comparison with sites that are located in 3' UTRs.
1035) The target sites that we used in our analysis were either predicted computationally or inferred on the basis of transcript- or protein-level changes following miRNA transfections.
1037) On the other hand, sites located in 3' UTR are much more effective at inducing mRNA degradation, as reported before (Baek et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).Previous SectionNext SectionResultsBoth CDS and 3' UTR sites are under evolutionary selectionThe application of the ElMMo model to miRNA target prediction in 3' UTRs was described before (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and recent assessments indicate that ElMMo is among the most accurate miRNA target prediction methods available (Alexiou et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Sturm et al. 2010).
1038) ElMMo is parameter-free and, by building its background model from the appropriate type of regions, it can in principle predict miRNA target sites in transcript or genomic regions that do not correspond to 3' UTRs.
1040) (Dashed red line) First principal component of the scatter.ElMMo further estimates a miRNA-specific probability that a site that is complementary to the miRNA in the reference species (in this case human) is under selection in at least one other species taken into account in the miRNA target prediction.
1041) These results suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites evolve in parallel and that CDS sites must have a function that confers a selective advantage in evolution.miRNAs that function in embryonic development co-target the 3' UTR and the CDSThe proportion of miRNA-complementary sites estimated to be under evolutionary selection in CDS as opposed to 3' UTRs differs between miRNAs (Fig. 2A).
1043) On the other hand, motifs that are complementary to miRNAs with embryonic expression—hsa-miR-302a-3p, hsa-miR-369-3p, hsa-miR-372, hsa-miR-373-3p, hsa-miR-374b/c-5p (Suh et al. 2004), the homologs of which have been shown to be involved in maternal mRNA clearance in zebrafish (Giraldez et al. 2006)—or to the oncogenic miRNAs of the miR-17 family—hsa-miR-17-5p, hsa-miR-20a/b-5p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-106a/b-5p (He et al. 2005)—are more frequent in the 3' UTRs (see also Supplemental Table 1).Figure 2.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 2.Individual miRNAs differ in their preference for targeting the CDS and the 3' UTR as well as in their tendency to simultaneously target the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual genes.
1044) (B) Scatter plot of the CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting preference of individual miRNAs against the fold enrichment in transcripts that are targeted in both the CDS and 3' UTR relative to what would be expected if the sites were independently distributed.
1046) We then determined the fold enrichments in the number of such co-targeted genes relative to what would be expected if miRNAs targeted the CDS and the 3' UTR independently (see section “Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR” in Methods).
1047) We found significant evidence of CDS and 3' UTR co-targeting for 62 human miRNAs (P < 0.05 at Fisher's exact test after Bonferroni correction; see Supplemental Table 2).
1048) Among these were many miRNAs with important functions: the epithelial cell-specific (Gregory et al. 2008) hsa-miR-141-3p/200a-3p (P < 10-11), the embryonic stem cell-expressed (Suh et al. 2004; Stadler et al. 2010) hsa-miR-302/372/373-3p/520a-3p (P < 10-8), the oncogenic component of the mir-17/92 cluster hsa-miR-19a-3p (P < 10-6) (Ventura et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009), the oncogenic hsa-miR-130b-3p/hsa-miR-301a-3p miRNAs (P < 10-6) (Shi et al. 2011), and the hsa-miR-137 (P < 10-6), that is involved in neural maturation (Smrt et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2011).The tendency for these miRNAs to target both the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual mRNAs cannot be explained by a general tendency of motif co-occurrence in the CDS and 3' UTR of the same transcripts because co-targeting enrichments beyond threefold are very rarely observed for random motifs (Supplemental Fig. 11).
1050) The x-axis shows the preference of the miRNA for CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting defined as the signed distance to the line representing the scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites (Fig. 2A) for the respective miRNA.
1053) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1054) We further found that highly conserved miRNA target sites share these properties, suggesting that miRNA target sites in 3' UTRs have been selected in evolution based on their ability to induce mRNA degradation.
1057) Functional target sites were defined as those that had a high posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or those whose associated transcripts or proteins responded in miRNA transfection experiments (see Methods).
1058) Nonfunctional target sites were defined as those that had a low posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or whose associated transcripts or proteins did not respond in miRNA transfection experiments.
1059) For each target site, we computed 32 properties that quantify the structure and sequence context of miRNA binding sites (listed in section 1.2 of the Supplemental Material).
1061) In particular, U-rich and structurally accessible environments characterize functional miRNA target sites, irrespective of their location in CDS or 3' UTRs.
1062) Positive and negative values denote positive and negative predictors of functional miRNA binding sites, respectively.mRNA destabilization occurs mainly when miRNAs bind to sites in 3' UTRsTo investigate the possible function of CDS-located miRNA target sites, we first compiled, from the miRNA transfection experiments of Linsley et al. (2007) and Grimson et al. (2007), transcripts that satisfied one of the following four mutually exclusive constraints.
1063) Fold changes were normalized to the average fold change of mRNAs that did not contain canonical binding sites to the transfected miRNA.CDS binding sites can effectively inhibit translationAlthough miRNAs significantly reduce the mRNA levels of their targets (Bagga et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005), the initial paradigm was that miRNAs inhibit translation without affecting mRNA levels (Lee et al. 1993; Wightman et al. 1993), and the relative contribution of these mechanisms is still a matter of debate (Eulalio et al. 2008; Filipowicz et al. 2008; Béthune et al. 2012; David 2012).
1064) As shown in Figure 5 and previously reported by Guo et al. (2010), transcripts that are targeted in the 3' UTR are strongly down-regulated at 32 h after transfection, and their ribosome occupancy at this time largely reflects the mRNA level.
1066) Finally, we constructed reporters to measure the effect of a miRNA on the protein and mRNA level of miRNA targets with CDS-located target sites.
1067) We then selected two conserved CDS miR-124 target sites that were represented with a relatively high number of reads in the EIF2C2 (also known as Ago2) CLIP data of Hafner et al. (2010).
1069) Another recurrent finding is that changes in target mRNA level upon miRNA transfection or overexpression are small.
1070) How these small effects can confer a selective advantage that is reflected in the strong evolutionary conservation of the target sites remains a puzzle.
1071) This applies especially to target sites located in coding regions, whose effects appear to be substantially smaller compared with those in 3' UTRs (Gu et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Schnall-Levin et al. 2010, 2011; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).
1072) In the Bazzini et al. (2012) data, however, what is observed is preferential stabilization of known dre-miR-430 targets, which suggests either a direct involvement of miRNA-dependent regulation or an indirect correlation caused by the overlap between the set of mRNAs that undergo polyadenylation changes in development and the set of dre-miR-430 targets.
1075) On one side of the spectrum are miRNAs expressed in the embryonic cells and miRNAs of the miR-17-92 cluster, that target predominantly 3' UTRs, but also show the strongest enrichment in CDS–3' UTR co-targeting.
1076) This suggests that these miRNAs strongly and robustly down-regulate target genes, for example at developmental transitions.
1077) Future work will determine the magnitude and timing of gene repression induced by miRNAs binding to the coding regions to uncover new aspects of miRNA biology.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsEstimation of the selection pressure on CDS and 3' UTR target sitesIn a previous study, we introduced the ElMMo model for inferring miRNA target sites based on comparative genomics data (Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1079) ElMMo predicts miRNA target site by estimating the selection pressure on motifs that are complementary to specific miRNAs, relative to a “background” set of motifs that do not correspond to miRNAs.
1080) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1081) Finally, predictions of miRNA binding sites under selection pressure are available as flat files from http://www.mirz.unibas.ch/miRNAtargetPredictionBulk.php.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sites from combined miRNA perturbation and microarray experimentsAmong the mRNA profiling data sets that we reanalyzed, the experiments performed by Grimson et al. (2007), Baek et al. (2008), Selbach et al. (2008), and Guo et al. (2010) did not feature biological replicates.
1083) Further assuming that transcripts that do not carry at least a heptameric seed-complementary site are unlikely to be real targets, we estimated µk and sk from the observed expression changes of transcripts without such seed matches.
1085) Not knowing the distribution of the severity of the effect that miRNAs have on the expression of their targets we assumed as little as possible about the distribution Pk(f | +), namely that a true target must change expression in the right direction, i.e., f < 0 for a miRNA overexpression experiment, and that expression changes are limited to a finite range over which the expression change has a “uniform” distribution.
1086) Finally, based on these distributions, we estimated the posterior probability that a transcript with fold change f was a functional target in a given experiment.To obtain nonfunctional binding sites, we selected those transcripts with the smallest sum of squared log2 fold changes in the biological replicates.
1087) Finally, for the purpose of comparing the properties of functional and nonfunctional sites, we proceeded as with experiments where no replicates were performed: We selected 250 functional sites and 250 nonfunctional sites according to the criteria defined above and we discarded those cases in which the seed match was in the 5' UTR.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from ElMMo predictionsFrom our predictions of miRNA target sites under evolutionary selection (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and for each of the experimentally tested and evolutionarily conserved miRNAs (hsa-miR-30a-5p, hsa-let-7c, hsa-miR-155-5p, hsa-miR-1, hsa-miR-103-3p, hsa-miR-15a-5p, hsa-miR-16-5p, hsa-miR-106b-5p, hsa-miR-20a-5p, hsa-miR-141-3p, hsa-miR-200a-3p, hsa-miR-181a-5p, hsa-miR-124-3p and hsa-miR-17-5p), we selected the top 250 target sites in the order of their posterior probability of being under selection.
1088) This procedure was applied to the 3' UTR and CDS ElMMo miRNA target site predictions separately.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)The 40-nt windows were sorted by decreasing posterior probability, and, in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment in CLIP reads (see “mRNA site extraction from EIF2C2 CLIP experiments” in Methods).
1089) For each individual putative target site we then computed 32 sequence and structure properties, described in detail in the Supplemental Methods and Hausser et al. (2009).Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTRTo determine whether individual miRNAs tend to target the same genes in the CDS and in the 3' UTR more than expected by chance, we determined, for each miRNA, the number c11 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS and at least one of the 250 top 3' UTR binding sites predicted by ElMMo.
1091) Similarly, we determined the number c01 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites but none of the top 250 predicted CDS binding sites.Under the hypothesis that miRNAs target the CDS and 3' UTR independently, we expect a fraction Graphic of all mRNAs to be co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR, where n = 18,430 is the number of representative mRNAs used in the analysis.
1106) Transcriptome-wide identification of RNA-binding protein and microRNA target sites by PAR-CLIP.
1109) RNA-binding protein Dnd1 inhibits microRNA access to target mRNA.
1111) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
1113) miR-24 regulates apoptosis by targeting the open reading frame (ORF) region of FAF1 in cancer cells.
1118) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1119) miR-141 and miR-200a act on ovarian tumorigenesis by controlling oxidative stress response.
1120) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
1121) miR-24 regulates apoptosis by targeting the open reading frame (ORF) region of FAF1 in cancer cells.
1123) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1124) Application of high-throughput approaches for isolating Argonaute-bound target sites indicates that CDS sites are as numerous as those located in 3' UTRs (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), though the density of Argonaute-bound sites is higher in 3' UTR compared with CDS (Hafner et al. 2010).If CDS sites are as common as Argonaute cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies indicate (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), one wonders why there are relatively few reports on their involvement in gene regulation and why the studies that have been so far published suggest that CDS sites are much less effective in down-regulating mRNA levels upon miRNA transfection (Baek et al. 2008; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011; Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1125) Forman et al. (2008) used alignments of CDS regions in 17 species to identify conserved miRNA-complementary sites in 700 human genes.
1126) On the other hand, motifs that are complementary to miRNAs with embryonic expression—hsa-miR-302a-3p, hsa-miR-369-3p, hsa-miR-372, hsa-miR-373-3p, hsa-miR-374b/c-5p (Suh et al. 2004), the homologs of which have been shown to be involved in maternal mRNA clearance in zebrafish (Giraldez et al. 2006)—or to the oncogenic miRNAs of the miR-17 family—hsa-miR-17-5p, hsa-miR-20a/b-5p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-106a/b-5p (He et al. 2005)—are more frequent in the 3' UTRs (see also Supplemental Table 1).Figure 2.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 2.Individual miRNAs differ in their preference for targeting the CDS and the 3' UTR as well as in their tendency to simultaneously target the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual genes.
1127) To answer this question, we determined the number of genes that contained both one of the 250 highest-scoring CDS binding sites and one of the 250 highest-scoring 3' UTR sites for a given miRNA, as predicted by the ElMMo algorithm.
1128) We then determined the fold enrichments in the number of such co-targeted genes relative to what would be expected if miRNAs targeted the CDS and the 3' UTR independently (see section “Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR” in Methods).
1129) Among these were many miRNAs with important functions: the epithelial cell-specific (Gregory et al. 2008) hsa-miR-141-3p/200a-3p (P < 10-11), the embryonic stem cell-expressed (Suh et al. 2004; Stadler et al. 2010) hsa-miR-302/372/373-3p/520a-3p (P < 10-8), the oncogenic component of the mir-17/92 cluster hsa-miR-19a-3p (P < 10-6) (Ventura et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009), the oncogenic hsa-miR-130b-3p/hsa-miR-301a-3p miRNAs (P < 10-6) (Shi et al. 2011), and the hsa-miR-137 (P < 10-6), that is involved in neural maturation (Smrt et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2011).The tendency for these miRNAs to target both the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual mRNAs cannot be explained by a general tendency of motif co-occurrence in the CDS and 3' UTR of the same transcripts because co-targeting enrichments beyond threefold are very rarely observed for random motifs (Supplemental Fig. 11).
1130) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1131) Fold changes were determined relative to the average fold change of mRNAs with no seed matches.To assess the generality of these findings we revisited the data from a very recent study that investigated the miRNA-induced translational inhibition and mRNA degradation during maternal-zygotic transition in zebrafish (Bazzini et al. 2012).
1132) First, we generated a HEK293T stable cell line containing an episomal pRTS-1 vector from which the expression of hsa-miR-124-3p can be induced with doxycyclin.
1133) These findings suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites function through similar mechanisms and have a comparable impact on gene expression.Simultaneous measurement of mRNA and protein levels is nontrivial for a variety of reasons.
1134) This may reflect another unsuspected complexity of the kinetics of miRNA-dependent gene regulation (Bazzini et al. 2012; Béthune et al. 2012; Djuranovic et al. 2012).
1135) This suggests that these miRNAs strongly and robustly down-regulate target genes, for example at developmental transitions.
1136) Future work will determine the magnitude and timing of gene repression induced by miRNAs binding to the coding regions to uncover new aspects of miRNA biology.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsEstimation of the selection pressure on CDS and 3' UTR target sitesIn a previous study, we introduced the ElMMo model for inferring miRNA target sites based on comparative genomics data (Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1137) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1139) For each gene, we defined a representative mRNA as the longest mRNA in RefSeq featuring 5' UTR, coding domain, and 3' UTR annotation.Computational analysis of quantitative proteomics and microarray dataWe followed the methods previously described in Hausser et al. (2009), except for minor changes in the analysis pipeline and for the use of updated genomic, mRNA, and protein sequence databases.
1141) For the analysis, we only considered 10,222 genes with nonzero expression levels in all experimental conditions (mock, hsa-miR-155-5p, and hsa-miR-1 transfections/mRNA and rpf sequencing/0, 12, and 32 h after transfection).To investigate the effect of the transfected miRNAs on mRNA stability and translation, we first computed the log2 fold change in rpf and mRNA expression upon miRNA transfection compared with mock transfection.
1142) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1145) In our thought experiment, all CLIP sites are equally prone to be bound by the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.
1147) For each individual putative target site we then computed 32 sequence and structure properties, described in detail in the Supplemental Methods and Hausser et al. (2009).Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTRTo determine whether individual miRNAs tend to target the same genes in the CDS and in the 3' UTR more than expected by chance, we determined, for each miRNA, the number c11 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS and at least one of the 250 top 3' UTR binding sites predicted by ElMMo.
1149) In addition, we also determined the number c10 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS binding sites, but not any of the 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites.
1150) Similarly, we determined the number c01 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites but none of the top 250 predicted CDS binding sites.Under the hypothesis that miRNAs target the CDS and 3' UTR independently, we expect a fraction Graphic of all mRNAs to be co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR, where n = 18,430 is the number of representative mRNAs used in the analysis.
1153) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
1155) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
1157) miR-141 and miR-200a act on ovarian tumorigenesis by controlling oxidative stress response.
1158) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
1160) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1163) There is growing evidence that plant miRNAs can induce translational repression via imperfect complementarity interactions with target sites in CDS and 3' UTRs (Brodersen et al. 2008; Lanet et al. 2009).
1165) Application of high-throughput approaches for isolating Argonaute-bound target sites indicates that CDS sites are as numerous as those located in 3' UTRs (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), though the density of Argonaute-bound sites is higher in 3' UTR compared with CDS (Hafner et al. 2010).If CDS sites are as common as Argonaute cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies indicate (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), one wonders why there are relatively few reports on their involvement in gene regulation and why the studies that have been so far published suggest that CDS sites are much less effective in down-regulating mRNA levels upon miRNA transfection (Baek et al. 2008; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011; Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1166) A reason may be that CDS sites function in specific contexts, in which coding regions are accessible to the miRNA-loaded silencing complex, while under normal conditions the process of translation hinders miRNA binding to these sites (Bartel 2009; Gu et al. 2009).
1167) For instance, it has recently been found that hsa-miR-181a targets multiple members of the C2H2 zinc finger domain family, through multiple CDS sites that occur precisely in the regions of the transcripts that encode the C2H2 domains (Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1169) Thus, none of the hypotheses mentioned above can explain the discrepancy between the apparent abundance of CDS sites and the paucity of reports about their function.Evolutionary conservation has been successfully employed to predict regulatory elements, including binding sites for miRNAs in 3' UTRs (Krek et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005; Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1172) Forman et al. (2008) used alignments of CDS regions in 17 species to identify conserved miRNA-complementary sites in 700 human genes.
1174) Schnall-Levin et al. (2010) allowed for the possibility that sites are not perfectly conserved among “all” genomes used in the inference to show that miRNA targeting in CDS is as common as in the 3' UTRs in Drosophila species.
1175) They further predicted 26,000 and 14,000 sites in human 3' UTR and CDS regions, respectively.
1176) Finally, Fang and Rajewsky (2011) found evidence that mRNAs that are simultaneously targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR are slightly more destabilized than mRNA targeted only in the 3' UTR, while Schnall-Levin et al. (2011) showed that mRNAs with several miRNA binding sites in the CDS can effectively be degraded.In the present study we analyzed putative miRNA target sites that are located in coding regions, with the aim of uncovering the function of such sites by comparison with sites that are located in 3' UTRs.
1177) The target sites that we used in our analysis were either predicted computationally or inferred on the basis of transcript- or protein-level changes following miRNA transfections.
1179) On the other hand, sites located in 3' UTR are much more effective at inducing mRNA degradation, as reported before (Baek et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).Previous SectionNext SectionResultsBoth CDS and 3' UTR sites are under evolutionary selectionThe application of the ElMMo model to miRNA target prediction in 3' UTRs was described before (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and recent assessments indicate that ElMMo is among the most accurate miRNA target prediction methods available (Alexiou et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Sturm et al. 2010).
1180) ElMMo is parameter-free and, by building its background model from the appropriate type of regions, it can in principle predict miRNA target sites in transcript or genomic regions that do not correspond to 3' UTRs.
1182) To determine whether the ElMMo-predicted CDS sites are functional we analyzed eight published data sets (listed in Table 1) that compared mRNA expression before and after transfections of individual miRNAs.
1185) As Figure 1A (and Supplemental Fig. 1) shows, both CDS and 3' UTR sites that are located in down-regulated transcripts have a higher probability to be under selection compared with sites that are located in transcripts that do not respond to transfection.
1187) In principle, these transcripts were expressed and bound by Argonaute proteins, so the transfected miRNAs should have had access to all seed-matching sites in these transcripts.
1190) These results indicate that ElMMo predicts functional sites not only in 3' UTRs but also in CDSs.View this table:In this window In a new windowTable 1.The data sets that we used to identify properties of functional miRNA binding sites in the 3' UTR and in the CDSFigure 1.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 1.(A) CDS- and 3' UTR-located miRNA binding sites that induce mRNA degradation or are isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are under stronger selection pressure compared with miRNA-complementary sites that were not functional in these experiments; 2274 CDS- and 3956 3' UTR-located sites that induce mRNA degradation are compared with 3513 CDS- and 3268 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce mRNA degradation; 751 CDS- and 786 3' UTR-located sites isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are compared with 1059 CDS- and 956 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce EIF2C2 binding.
1192) (Dashed red line) First principal component of the scatter.ElMMo further estimates a miRNA-specific probability that a site that is complementary to the miRNA in the reference species (in this case human) is under selection in at least one other species taken into account in the miRNA target prediction.
1196) These results suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites evolve in parallel and that CDS sites must have a function that confers a selective advantage in evolution.miRNAs that function in embryonic development co-target the 3' UTR and the CDSThe proportion of miRNA-complementary sites estimated to be under evolutionary selection in CDS as opposed to 3' UTRs differs between miRNAs (Fig. 2A).
1198) (Red dashed line) Scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites, defined as the line that goes through the origin and maximizes the projected variance.
1199) (B) Scatter plot of the CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting preference of individual miRNAs against the fold enrichment in transcripts that are targeted in both the CDS and 3' UTR relative to what would be expected if the sites were independently distributed.
1200) To answer this question, we determined the number of genes that contained both one of the 250 highest-scoring CDS binding sites and one of the 250 highest-scoring 3' UTR sites for a given miRNA, as predicted by the ElMMo algorithm.
1201) The x-axis shows the preference of the miRNA for CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting defined as the signed distance to the line representing the scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites (Fig. 2A) for the respective miRNA.
1202) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1203) We further found that highly conserved miRNA target sites share these properties, suggesting that miRNA target sites in 3' UTRs have been selected in evolution based on their ability to induce mRNA degradation.
1206) Functional target sites were defined as those that had a high posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or those whose associated transcripts or proteins responded in miRNA transfection experiments (see Methods).
1207) Nonfunctional target sites were defined as those that had a low posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or whose associated transcripts or proteins did not respond in miRNA transfection experiments.
1208) For each target site, we computed 32 properties that quantify the structure and sequence context of miRNA binding sites (listed in section 1.2 of the Supplemental Material).
1211) In particular, U-rich and structurally accessible environments characterize functional miRNA target sites, irrespective of their location in CDS or 3' UTRs.
1212) The correlation is considerably smaller for sites obtained based on measurement of protein expression changes for reasons that are presently unknown (Hausser et al. 2009).
1214) Sets of functional and nonfunctional binding sites were defined according to four different criteria—selective pressure, efficacy in mRNA degradation, efficacy in reducing protein levels, and binding to EIF2C2—each corresponding to a different panel.
1216) Positive and negative values denote positive and negative predictors of functional miRNA binding sites, respectively.mRNA destabilization occurs mainly when miRNAs bind to sites in 3' UTRsTo investigate the possible function of CDS-located miRNA target sites, we first compiled, from the miRNA transfection experiments of Linsley et al. (2007) and Grimson et al. (2007), transcripts that satisfied one of the following four mutually exclusive constraints.
1220) Fold changes were normalized to the average fold change of mRNAs that did not contain canonical binding sites to the transfected miRNA.CDS binding sites can effectively inhibit translationAlthough miRNAs significantly reduce the mRNA levels of their targets (Bagga et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005), the initial paradigm was that miRNAs inhibit translation without affecting mRNA levels (Lee et al. 1993; Wightman et al. 1993), and the relative contribution of these mechanisms is still a matter of debate (Eulalio et al. 2008; Filipowicz et al. 2008; Béthune et al. 2012; David 2012).
1221) They found that at 32 h post-transfection, the reduction in ribosome occupancy of transcripts with miRNA binding sites in 3' UTRs could be attributed in very large measure (84%) to the reduction in mRNA levels.We asked whether this observation holds equally true for transcripts with miRNA-complementary sites that are located not in the 3' UTR but rather in the CDS.
1222) This suggests that miRNA binding sites that are located in CDS are effective in inducing translational inhibition immediately after miRNA transfection while sites located in the 3' UTR sites are effective in down-regulating the mRNA levels.Figure 5.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 5.CDS-located binding sites transiently inhibit translation in miRNA transfection experiments.
1223) Fold changes were determined relative to the average fold change of mRNAs with no seed matches.To assess the generality of these findings we revisited the data from a very recent study that investigated the miRNA-induced translational inhibition and mRNA degradation during maternal-zygotic transition in zebrafish (Bazzini et al. 2012).
1227) As shown in Supplemental Figure 15, the expression levels of mRNAs with CDS sites change very little upon knockout of miR-223 whereas their translation increases in the absence of the miRNA to a degree comparable to the translation of transcripts with binding sites in 3' UTRs.
1228) Finally, we constructed reporters to measure the effect of a miRNA on the protein and mRNA level of miRNA targets with CDS-located target sites.
1229) We then selected two conserved CDS miR-124 target sites that were represented with a relatively high number of reads in the EIF2C2 (also known as Ago2) CLIP data of Hafner et al. (2010).
1232) Thus, in human, mouse and zebrafish, CDS-located miRNA binding sites appear to be more effective in translational inhibition than in mRNA degradation.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn spite of much research, the mechanisms of action and the function of miRNAs are insufficiently understood.
1233) How these small effects can confer a selective advantage that is reflected in the strong evolutionary conservation of the target sites remains a puzzle.
1234) This applies especially to target sites located in coding regions, whose effects appear to be substantially smaller compared with those in 3' UTRs (Gu et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Schnall-Levin et al. 2010, 2011; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).
1236) We thus predicted miRNA binding sites in CDS and used them to comparatively investigate the properties and effects of miRNA-complementary sites that are located in the coding domain or in the 3' UTR.
1239) These findings suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites function through similar mechanisms and have a comparable impact on gene expression.Simultaneous measurement of mRNA and protein levels is nontrivial for a variety of reasons.
1240) For the first time, our analysis of such data reveals an effect that CDS-located miRNA binding sites are capable of inducing more effectively than 3' UTR-located sites, namely a rapid reduction in mRNA translation.
1241) Thus, transient expression of the miRNA is probably not an explanation in this case, although it cannot be entirely ruled out because dre-miR-430 may be displaced from the RNA-induced silencing complex by other miRNAs at later time points.Interestingly, in both the zebrafish system and our reporter system, some mRNAs with miRNA binding sites in coding regions appear to be up-regulated upon miRNA expression.
1242) These miRNAs appear to preferentially bind to CDS-located sites, which we found to be effective in rapid inhibition of translation.
1243) Future work will determine the magnitude and timing of gene repression induced by miRNAs binding to the coding regions to uncover new aspects of miRNA biology.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsEstimation of the selection pressure on CDS and 3' UTR target sitesIn a previous study, we introduced the ElMMo model for inferring miRNA target sites based on comparative genomics data (Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1244) ElMMo is parameter-free, requiring only a set of miRNA-complementary, putative sites in a reference species and pairwise genome alignments between the reference species and other species.
1247) ElMMo predicts miRNA target site by estimating the selection pressure on motifs that are complementary to specific miRNAs, relative to a “background” set of motifs that do not correspond to miRNAs.
1248) By simply changing the type of sequences in the input data set (coding regions or 3' UTRs), ElMMo thus allows us to independently estimate the selection pressure on binding sites for individual miRNAs in CDS and 3' UTRs, respectively.
1249) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1250) mRNAs were then divided into four subsets: those with no binding sites to the transfected miRNA, those with exactly one binding site located in the 3' UTR, those with exactly one binding site located in the CDS, and mRNAs with two binding sites in the CDS.
1252) The overall effect of the transfected miRNA on rpf and mRNA levels was estimated by subtracting the log2 fold change of mRNAs without binding sites from that of mRNAs with binding sites (defined as above).
1256) In case several miRNAs mapped to a binding site, the site was assigned to most highly expressed miRNA.
1257) HEK293 miRNA profiles were determined from the two mild MNase digestion EIF2C2 CLIP samples of Kishore et al. (2011), using the methodology described in that paper.mRNA site extraction from the EIF2C2 CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)Outline of the statistical modelFor each of the c sites yielded by the CLIP experiment, we compare the observed number of CLIP reads ri with the number of reads expected under a background model in which the number of reads per CLIP site depends only on the abundance of the corresponding mRNA.
1258) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1262) In our thought experiment, all CLIP sites are equally prone to be bound by the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.
1269) By applying the same reasoning to P(ri|r, H0), one can show the denominator of Equation 7 to beFormula(11)Finally, substituting Equations 10 and 11 into Equation 7 gives a simple expression for the posterior probability P(H1|r, ri) that the number of CLIP reads ri mapping to site i is larger than what would be expected given the abundance of the mRNA alone:Formulawhich is the reverse cumulative probability of a Beta distribution.To obtain binding sites, 40-nt windows are ranked by decreasing posterior probability first, and in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment ratios Graphic.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sitesData sets used in the analysisThe microarray and deep-sequencing data for the following references were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accessions GSE6838 and GSE8501 for Linsley et al. (2007), GSE14537 for Hausser et al. (2009), GSE11968 for Baek et al. (2008), GDS1858 for Grimson et al. (2007), GSE22004 for Guo et al. (2010), and GSE28865 for Kishore et al. (2011).
1270) Finally, predictions of miRNA binding sites under selection pressure are available as flat files from http://www.mirz.unibas.ch/miRNAtargetPredictionBulk.php.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sites from combined miRNA perturbation and microarray experimentsAmong the mRNA profiling data sets that we reanalyzed, the experiments performed by Grimson et al. (2007), Baek et al. (2008), Selbach et al. (2008), and Guo et al. (2010) did not feature biological replicates.
1271) Further assuming that transcripts that do not carry at least a heptameric seed-complementary site are unlikely to be real targets, we estimated µk and sk from the observed expression changes of transcripts without such seed matches.
1272) Finally, based on these distributions, we estimated the posterior probability that a transcript with fold change f was a functional target in a given experiment.To obtain nonfunctional binding sites, we selected those transcripts with the smallest sum of squared log2 fold changes in the biological replicates.
1273) Finally, for the purpose of comparing the properties of functional and nonfunctional sites, we proceeded as with experiments where no replicates were performed: We selected 250 functional sites and 250 nonfunctional sites according to the criteria defined above and we discarded those cases in which the seed match was in the 5' UTR.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from ElMMo predictionsFrom our predictions of miRNA target sites under evolutionary selection (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and for each of the experimentally tested and evolutionarily conserved miRNAs (hsa-miR-30a-5p, hsa-let-7c, hsa-miR-155-5p, hsa-miR-1, hsa-miR-103-3p, hsa-miR-15a-5p, hsa-miR-16-5p, hsa-miR-106b-5p, hsa-miR-20a-5p, hsa-miR-141-3p, hsa-miR-200a-3p, hsa-miR-181a-5p, hsa-miR-124-3p and hsa-miR-17-5p), we selected the top 250 target sites in the order of their posterior probability of being under selection.
1275) This procedure was applied to the 3' UTR and CDS ElMMo miRNA target site predictions separately.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)The 40-nt windows were sorted by decreasing posterior probability, and, in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment in CLIP reads (see “mRNA site extraction from EIF2C2 CLIP experiments” in Methods).
1277) Finally, CDS binding sites were obtained in a similar fashion from windows located in coding domains.Properties definition and computationFor data sets in which the effect could not be unambiguously attributed to a single site (all data sets other than those derived by CLIP and comparative genomic analysis), we only analyzed mRNAs that had precisely one canonical miRNA seed match (7mer-A1, 7mer-m8, or 8mer).
1279) For each individual putative target site we then computed 32 sequence and structure properties, described in detail in the Supplemental Methods and Hausser et al. (2009).Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTRTo determine whether individual miRNAs tend to target the same genes in the CDS and in the 3' UTR more than expected by chance, we determined, for each miRNA, the number c11 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS and at least one of the 250 top 3' UTR binding sites predicted by ElMMo.
1280) In addition, we also determined the number c10 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS binding sites, but not any of the 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites.
1281) Similarly, we determined the number c01 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites but none of the top 250 predicted CDS binding sites.Under the hypothesis that miRNAs target the CDS and 3' UTR independently, we expect a fraction Graphic of all mRNAs to be co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR, where n = 18,430 is the number of representative mRNAs used in the analysis.
1283) Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.139758.112.Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.Received February 28, 2012.Accepted January 16, 2013.© 2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml).
1285) Transcriptome-wide identification of RNA-binding protein and microRNA target sites by PAR-CLIP.
1286) CLIPZ: A database and analysis environment for experimentally determined binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1287) A quantitative analysis of CLIP methods for identifying binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1288) MicroRNAs differentially expressed in postnatal aortic development downregulate elastin via 3' UTR and coding-sequence binding sites.
1289) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1290) Our study suggests that miRNAs may combine targeting of CDS and 3' UTR to flexibly tune the time scale and magnitude of their post-transcriptional regulatory effects.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~21 nt (nucleotide)-long regulatory RNAs that are encoded in the genomes of species ranging from viruses to human.
1291) They form miRNA-induced silencing complexes (miRISCs) with Argonaute proteins which they guide, through hybridization, to target mRNAs whose expression is subsequently down-regulated (Bushati and Cohen 2007; Bartel 2009).
1292) Application of high-throughput approaches for isolating Argonaute-bound target sites indicates that CDS sites are as numerous as those located in 3' UTRs (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), though the density of Argonaute-bound sites is higher in 3' UTR compared with CDS (Hafner et al. 2010).If CDS sites are as common as Argonaute cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies indicate (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), one wonders why there are relatively few reports on their involvement in gene regulation and why the studies that have been so far published suggest that CDS sites are much less effective in down-regulating mRNA levels upon miRNA transfection (Baek et al. 2008; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011; Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1293) Thus, none of the hypotheses mentioned above can explain the discrepancy between the apparent abundance of CDS sites and the paucity of reports about their function.Evolutionary conservation has been successfully employed to predict regulatory elements, including binding sites for miRNAs in 3' UTRs (Krek et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005; Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1296) As Figure 1A (and Supplemental Fig. 1) shows, both CDS and 3' UTR sites that are located in down-regulated transcripts have a higher probability to be under selection compared with sites that are located in transcripts that do not respond to transfection.
1299) As shown in Figure 5 and previously reported by Guo et al. (2010), transcripts that are targeted in the 3' UTR are strongly down-regulated at 32 h after transfection, and their ribosome occupancy at this time largely reflects the mRNA level.
1300) This suggests that miRNA binding sites that are located in CDS are effective in inducing translational inhibition immediately after miRNA transfection while sites located in the 3' UTR sites are effective in down-regulating the mRNA levels.Figure 5.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 5.CDS-located binding sites transiently inhibit translation in miRNA transfection experiments.
1301) Thus, transient expression of the miRNA is probably not an explanation in this case, although it cannot be entirely ruled out because dre-miR-430 may be displaced from the RNA-induced silencing complex by other miRNAs at later time points.Interestingly, in both the zebrafish system and our reporter system, some mRNAs with miRNA binding sites in coding regions appear to be up-regulated upon miRNA expression.
1302) This may reflect another unsuspected complexity of the kinetics of miRNA-dependent gene regulation (Bazzini et al. 2012; Béthune et al. 2012; Djuranovic et al. 2012).
1304) In the Bazzini et al. (2012) data, however, what is observed is preferential stabilization of known dre-miR-430 targets, which suggests either a direct involvement of miRNA-dependent regulation or an indirect correlation caused by the overlap between the set of mRNAs that undergo polyadenylation changes in development and the set of dre-miR-430 targets.
1306) This suggests that these miRNAs strongly and robustly down-regulate target genes, for example at developmental transitions.
1320) MicroRNAs differentially expressed in postnatal aortic development downregulate elastin via 3' UTR and coding-sequence binding sites.
1321) miR-24 regulates apoptosis by targeting the open reading frame (ORF) region of FAF1 in cancer cells.
1325) B.B. was supported by a Werner Siemens fellowship.Author contributions: M.Z. and J.H. designed the research, J.H. and B.B. performed analyses, A.P.S. performed the experiments, A.P.S. and J.H. analyzed the data, J.H. and M.Z. wrote the paper with the help of B.B. and A.P.S.Previous SectionNext SectionFootnotes?1 Corresponding authorsE-mail jean.hausser@unibas.chE-mail mihaela.zavolan@unibas.ch[Supplemental material is available for this article.]Article published online before print.
1326) Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.139758.112.Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.Received February 28, 2012.Accepted January 16, 2013.© 2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml).
1327) ElMMo is parameter-free and, by building its background model from the appropriate type of regions, it can in principle predict miRNA target sites in transcript or genomic regions that do not correspond to 3' UTRs.
1328) ElMMo is parameter-free, requiring only a set of miRNA-complementary, putative sites in a reference species and pairwise genome alignments between the reference species and other species.
1329) They form miRNA-induced silencing complexes (miRISCs) with Argonaute proteins which they guide, through hybridization, to target mRNAs whose expression is subsequently down-regulated (Bushati and Cohen 2007; Bartel 2009).
1330) The target sites that we used in our analysis were either predicted computationally or inferred on the basis of transcript- or protein-level changes following miRNA transfections.
1331) In principle, these transcripts were expressed and bound by Argonaute proteins, so the transfected miRNAs should have had access to all seed-matching sites in these transcripts.
1332) Functional target sites were defined as those that had a high posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or those whose associated transcripts or proteins responded in miRNA transfection experiments (see Methods).
1333) Nonfunctional target sites were defined as those that had a low posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or whose associated transcripts or proteins did not respond in miRNA transfection experiments.
1334) The correlation is considerably smaller for sites obtained based on measurement of protein expression changes for reasons that are presently unknown (Hausser et al. 2009).
1335) Sets of functional and nonfunctional binding sites were defined according to four different criteria—selective pressure, efficacy in mRNA degradation, efficacy in reducing protein levels, and binding to EIF2C2—each corresponding to a different panel.
1336) Finally, we constructed reporters to measure the effect of a miRNA on the protein and mRNA level of miRNA targets with CDS-located target sites.
1338) As shown in Supplemental Figure 17, wild-type constructs exhibit a reduction in protein expression relative to the mutant constructs that cannot be explained by a corresponding decrease in mRNA levels.
1339) Recent high-throughput studies concluded that the reduction in protein levels upon miRNA expression is largely a consequence of the mRNA degradation induced by miRNAs (Baek et al. 2008; Selbach et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010), though these initial experiments may have missed an important kinetic aspect (Bazzini et al. 2012).
1340) These findings suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites function through similar mechanisms and have a comparable impact on gene expression.Simultaneous measurement of mRNA and protein levels is nontrivial for a variety of reasons.
1341) Furthermore, proteomics measurements require that the proteins are labeled and this imposes constraints on the timing of miRNA transfection (or induction of expression).
1342) A few examples of crosstalk between RNA-binding proteins and the miRNA pathway have been described (Bhattacharyya et al. 2006; Kedde et al. 2007; Kedde and Agami 2008; Kim et al. 2009) and more are likely to emerge in the future.Finally, different families of miRNAs that are broadly expressed but are active in different contexts show distinct preferences for the CDS or 3' UTR.
1343) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1345) For each gene, we defined a representative mRNA as the longest mRNA in RefSeq featuring 5' UTR, coding domain, and 3' UTR annotation.Computational analysis of quantitative proteomics and microarray dataWe followed the methods previously described in Hausser et al. (2009), except for minor changes in the analysis pipeline and for the use of updated genomic, mRNA, and protein sequence databases.
1346) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1347) In our thought experiment, all CLIP sites are equally prone to be bound by the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.
1349) Transcriptome-wide identification of RNA-binding protein and microRNA target sites by PAR-CLIP.
1351) RNA-binding protein Dnd1 inhibits microRNA access to target mRNA.
1352) CLIPZ: A database and analysis environment for experimentally determined binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1353) A quantitative analysis of CLIP methods for identifying binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1356) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1357) In recent years, there has been increasing evidence that miRNAs also bind in the coding region (CDS), but the implication of these interactions remains obscure because they have a smaller impact on mRNA stability compared with miRNA-target interactions that involve 3' UTRs.
1358) A reason may be that CDS sites function in specific contexts, in which coding regions are accessible to the miRNA-loaded silencing complex, while under normal conditions the process of translation hinders miRNA binding to these sites (Bartel 2009; Gu et al. 2009).
1359) Thus, none of the hypotheses mentioned above can explain the discrepancy between the apparent abundance of CDS sites and the paucity of reports about their function.Evolutionary conservation has been successfully employed to predict regulatory elements, including binding sites for miRNAs in 3' UTRs (Krek et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005; Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1360) Finally, Fang and Rajewsky (2011) found evidence that mRNAs that are simultaneously targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR are slightly more destabilized than mRNA targeted only in the 3' UTR, while Schnall-Levin et al. (2011) showed that mRNAs with several miRNA binding sites in the CDS can effectively be degraded.In the present study we analyzed putative miRNA target sites that are located in coding regions, with the aim of uncovering the function of such sites by comparison with sites that are located in 3' UTRs.
1361) These results indicate that ElMMo predicts functional sites not only in 3' UTRs but also in CDSs.View this table:In this window In a new windowTable 1.The data sets that we used to identify properties of functional miRNA binding sites in the 3' UTR and in the CDSFigure 1.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 1.(A) CDS- and 3' UTR-located miRNA binding sites that induce mRNA degradation or are isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are under stronger selection pressure compared with miRNA-complementary sites that were not functional in these experiments; 2274 CDS- and 3956 3' UTR-located sites that induce mRNA degradation are compared with 3513 CDS- and 3268 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce mRNA degradation; 751 CDS- and 786 3' UTR-located sites isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are compared with 1059 CDS- and 956 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce EIF2C2 binding.
1362) To answer this question, we determined the number of genes that contained both one of the 250 highest-scoring CDS binding sites and one of the 250 highest-scoring 3' UTR sites for a given miRNA, as predicted by the ElMMo algorithm.
1363) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1364) For each target site, we computed 32 properties that quantify the structure and sequence context of miRNA binding sites (listed in section 1.2 of the Supplemental Material).
1366) Sets of functional and nonfunctional binding sites were defined according to four different criteria—selective pressure, efficacy in mRNA degradation, efficacy in reducing protein levels, and binding to EIF2C2—each corresponding to a different panel.
1367) Positive and negative values denote positive and negative predictors of functional miRNA binding sites, respectively.mRNA destabilization occurs mainly when miRNAs bind to sites in 3' UTRsTo investigate the possible function of CDS-located miRNA target sites, we first compiled, from the miRNA transfection experiments of Linsley et al. (2007) and Grimson et al. (2007), transcripts that satisfied one of the following four mutually exclusive constraints.
1369) Fold changes were normalized to the average fold change of mRNAs that did not contain canonical binding sites to the transfected miRNA.CDS binding sites can effectively inhibit translationAlthough miRNAs significantly reduce the mRNA levels of their targets (Bagga et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005), the initial paradigm was that miRNAs inhibit translation without affecting mRNA levels (Lee et al. 1993; Wightman et al. 1993), and the relative contribution of these mechanisms is still a matter of debate (Eulalio et al. 2008; Filipowicz et al. 2008; Béthune et al. 2012; David 2012).
1370) They found that at 32 h post-transfection, the reduction in ribosome occupancy of transcripts with miRNA binding sites in 3' UTRs could be attributed in very large measure (84%) to the reduction in mRNA levels.We asked whether this observation holds equally true for transcripts with miRNA-complementary sites that are located not in the 3' UTR but rather in the CDS.
1371) This suggests that miRNA binding sites that are located in CDS are effective in inducing translational inhibition immediately after miRNA transfection while sites located in the 3' UTR sites are effective in down-regulating the mRNA levels.Figure 5.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 5.CDS-located binding sites transiently inhibit translation in miRNA transfection experiments.
1372) As shown in Supplemental Figure 15, the expression levels of mRNAs with CDS sites change very little upon knockout of miR-223 whereas their translation increases in the absence of the miRNA to a degree comparable to the translation of transcripts with binding sites in 3' UTRs.
1373) Thus, in human, mouse and zebrafish, CDS-located miRNA binding sites appear to be more effective in translational inhibition than in mRNA degradation.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn spite of much research, the mechanisms of action and the function of miRNAs are insufficiently understood.
1375) We thus predicted miRNA binding sites in CDS and used them to comparatively investigate the properties and effects of miRNA-complementary sites that are located in the coding domain or in the 3' UTR.
1376) For the first time, our analysis of such data reveals an effect that CDS-located miRNA binding sites are capable of inducing more effectively than 3' UTR-located sites, namely a rapid reduction in mRNA translation.
1377) Thus, transient expression of the miRNA is probably not an explanation in this case, although it cannot be entirely ruled out because dre-miR-430 may be displaced from the RNA-induced silencing complex by other miRNAs at later time points.Interestingly, in both the zebrafish system and our reporter system, some mRNAs with miRNA binding sites in coding regions appear to be up-regulated upon miRNA expression.
1378) A few examples of crosstalk between RNA-binding proteins and the miRNA pathway have been described (Bhattacharyya et al. 2006; Kedde et al. 2007; Kedde and Agami 2008; Kim et al. 2009) and more are likely to emerge in the future.Finally, different families of miRNAs that are broadly expressed but are active in different contexts show distinct preferences for the CDS or 3' UTR.
1379) These miRNAs appear to preferentially bind to CDS-located sites, which we found to be effective in rapid inhibition of translation.
1380) Future work will determine the magnitude and timing of gene repression induced by miRNAs binding to the coding regions to uncover new aspects of miRNA biology.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsEstimation of the selection pressure on CDS and 3' UTR target sitesIn a previous study, we introduced the ElMMo model for inferring miRNA target sites based on comparative genomics data (Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1382) By simply changing the type of sequences in the input data set (coding regions or 3' UTRs), ElMMo thus allows us to independently estimate the selection pressure on binding sites for individual miRNAs in CDS and 3' UTRs, respectively.
1383) mRNAs were then divided into four subsets: those with no binding sites to the transfected miRNA, those with exactly one binding site located in the 3' UTR, those with exactly one binding site located in the CDS, and mRNAs with two binding sites in the CDS.
1384) The overall effect of the transfected miRNA on rpf and mRNA levels was estimated by subtracting the log2 fold change of mRNAs without binding sites from that of mRNAs with binding sites (defined as above).
1385) In case several miRNAs mapped to a binding site, the site was assigned to most highly expressed miRNA.
1386) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1387) In our thought experiment, all CLIP sites are equally prone to be bound by the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.
1388) By applying the same reasoning to P(ri|r, H0), one can show the denominator of Equation 7 to beFormula(11)Finally, substituting Equations 10 and 11 into Equation 7 gives a simple expression for the posterior probability P(H1|r, ri) that the number of CLIP reads ri mapping to site i is larger than what would be expected given the abundance of the mRNA alone:Formulawhich is the reverse cumulative probability of a Beta distribution.To obtain binding sites, 40-nt windows are ranked by decreasing posterior probability first, and in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment ratios Graphic.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sitesData sets used in the analysisThe microarray and deep-sequencing data for the following references were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accessions GSE6838 and GSE8501 for Linsley et al. (2007), GSE14537 for Hausser et al. (2009), GSE11968 for Baek et al. (2008), GDS1858 for Grimson et al. (2007), GSE22004 for Guo et al. (2010), and GSE28865 for Kishore et al. (2011).
1389) Finally, predictions of miRNA binding sites under selection pressure are available as flat files from http://www.mirz.unibas.ch/miRNAtargetPredictionBulk.php.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sites from combined miRNA perturbation and microarray experimentsAmong the mRNA profiling data sets that we reanalyzed, the experiments performed by Grimson et al. (2007), Baek et al. (2008), Selbach et al. (2008), and Guo et al. (2010) did not feature biological replicates.
1390) Finally, based on these distributions, we estimated the posterior probability that a transcript with fold change f was a functional target in a given experiment.To obtain nonfunctional binding sites, we selected those transcripts with the smallest sum of squared log2 fold changes in the biological replicates.
1392) Finally, CDS binding sites were obtained in a similar fashion from windows located in coding domains.Properties definition and computationFor data sets in which the effect could not be unambiguously attributed to a single site (all data sets other than those derived by CLIP and comparative genomic analysis), we only analyzed mRNAs that had precisely one canonical miRNA seed match (7mer-A1, 7mer-m8, or 8mer).
1393) For each individual putative target site we then computed 32 sequence and structure properties, described in detail in the Supplemental Methods and Hausser et al. (2009).Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTRTo determine whether individual miRNAs tend to target the same genes in the CDS and in the 3' UTR more than expected by chance, we determined, for each miRNA, the number c11 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS and at least one of the 250 top 3' UTR binding sites predicted by ElMMo.
1394) In addition, we also determined the number c10 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS binding sites, but not any of the 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites.
1395) Similarly, we determined the number c01 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites but none of the top 250 predicted CDS binding sites.Under the hypothesis that miRNAs target the CDS and 3' UTR independently, we expect a fraction Graphic of all mRNAs to be co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR, where n = 18,430 is the number of representative mRNAs used in the analysis.
1397) Transcriptome-wide identification of RNA-binding protein and microRNA target sites by PAR-CLIP.
1400) RNA-binding protein Dnd1 inhibits microRNA access to target mRNA.
1401) CLIPZ: A database and analysis environment for experimentally determined binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1402) A quantitative analysis of CLIP methods for identifying binding sites of RNA-binding proteins.
1403) MicroRNAs differentially expressed in postnatal aortic development downregulate elastin via 3' UTR and coding-sequence binding sites.
1404) Our study suggests that miRNAs may combine targeting of CDS and 3' UTR to flexibly tune the time scale and magnitude of their post-transcriptional regulatory effects.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~21 nt (nucleotide)-long regulatory RNAs that are encoded in the genomes of species ranging from viruses to human.
1405) Forman et al. (2008) used alignments of CDS regions in 17 species to identify conserved miRNA-complementary sites in 700 human genes.
1406) They further predicted 26,000 and 14,000 sites in human 3' UTR and CDS regions, respectively.
1407) (Dashed red line) First principal component of the scatter.ElMMo further estimates a miRNA-specific probability that a site that is complementary to the miRNA in the reference species (in this case human) is under selection in at least one other species taken into account in the miRNA target prediction.
1408) We found significant evidence of CDS and 3' UTR co-targeting for 62 human miRNAs (P < 0.05 at Fisher's exact test after Bonferroni correction; see Supplemental Table 2).
1409) Thus, in human, mouse and zebrafish, CDS-located miRNA binding sites appear to be more effective in translational inhibition than in mRNA degradation.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn spite of much research, the mechanisms of action and the function of miRNAs are insufficiently understood.
1410) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1413) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
1414) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
1418) miR-141 and miR-200a act on ovarian tumorigenesis by controlling oxidative stress response.
1420) (Dashed red line) First principal component of the scatter.ElMMo further estimates a miRNA-specific probability that a site that is complementary to the miRNA in the reference species (in this case human) is under selection in at least one other species taken into account in the miRNA target prediction.
1421) (Red dashed line) Scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites, defined as the line that goes through the origin and maximizes the projected variance.
1422) The x-axis shows the preference of the miRNA for CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting defined as the signed distance to the line representing the scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites (Fig. 2A) for the respective miRNA.
1423) First, we generated a HEK293T stable cell line containing an episomal pRTS-1 vector from which the expression of hsa-miR-124-3p can be induced with doxycyclin.
1424) For each gene, we defined a representative mRNA as the longest mRNA in RefSeq featuring 5' UTR, coding domain, and 3' UTR annotation.Computational analysis of quantitative proteomics and microarray dataWe followed the methods previously described in Hausser et al. (2009), except for minor changes in the analysis pipeline and for the use of updated genomic, mRNA, and protein sequence databases.
1425) HEK293 miRNA profiles were determined from the two mild MNase digestion EIF2C2 CLIP samples of Kishore et al. (2011), using the methodology described in that paper.mRNA site extraction from the EIF2C2 CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)Outline of the statistical modelFor each of the c sites yielded by the CLIP experiment, we compare the observed number of CLIP reads ri with the number of reads expected under a background model in which the number of reads per CLIP site depends only on the abundance of the corresponding mRNA.
1426) B.B. was supported by a Werner Siemens fellowship.Author contributions: M.Z. and J.H. designed the research, J.H. and B.B. performed analyses, A.P.S. performed the experiments, A.P.S. and J.H. analyzed the data, J.H. and M.Z. wrote the paper with the help of B.B. and A.P.S.Previous SectionNext SectionFootnotes?1 Corresponding authorsE-mail jean.hausser@unibas.chE-mail mihaela.zavolan@unibas.ch[Supplemental material is available for this article.]Article published online before print.
1427) Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.139758.112.Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.Received February 28, 2012.Accepted January 16, 2013.© 2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml).
1473) Analysis of CDS-located miRNA target sites suggests that they can effectively inhibit translationJean Hausser1, Afzal Pasha Syed, Biter Bilen and Mihaela Zavolan1+ Author AffiliationsBiozentrum, University of Basel and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 4056 Basel, Switzerland Next SectionAbstractMost of what is presently known about how miRNAs regulate gene expression comes from studies that characterized the regulatory effect of miRNA binding sites located in the 3' untranslated regions (UTR) of mRNAs.
1474) In recent years, there has been increasing evidence that miRNAs also bind in the coding region (CDS), but the implication of these interactions remains obscure because they have a smaller impact on mRNA stability compared with miRNA-target interactions that involve 3' UTRs.
1477) Our study suggests that miRNAs may combine targeting of CDS and 3' UTR to flexibly tune the time scale and magnitude of their post-transcriptional regulatory effects.MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~21 nt (nucleotide)-long regulatory RNAs that are encoded in the genomes of species ranging from viruses to human.
1480) There is growing evidence that plant miRNAs can induce translational repression via imperfect complementarity interactions with target sites in CDS and 3' UTRs (Brodersen et al. 2008; Lanet et al. 2009).
1481) Application of high-throughput approaches for isolating Argonaute-bound target sites indicates that CDS sites are as numerous as those located in 3' UTRs (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), though the density of Argonaute-bound sites is higher in 3' UTR compared with CDS (Hafner et al. 2010).If CDS sites are as common as Argonaute cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies indicate (Chi et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010), one wonders why there are relatively few reports on their involvement in gene regulation and why the studies that have been so far published suggest that CDS sites are much less effective in down-regulating mRNA levels upon miRNA transfection (Baek et al. 2008; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011; Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1482) A reason may be that CDS sites function in specific contexts, in which coding regions are accessible to the miRNA-loaded silencing complex, while under normal conditions the process of translation hinders miRNA binding to these sites (Bartel 2009; Gu et al. 2009).
1484) For instance, it has recently been found that hsa-miR-181a targets multiple members of the C2H2 zinc finger domain family, through multiple CDS sites that occur precisely in the regions of the transcripts that encode the C2H2 domains (Schnall-Levin et al. 2011).
1486) Forman et al. (2008) used alignments of CDS regions in 17 species to identify conserved miRNA-complementary sites in 700 human genes.
1487) Schnall-Levin et al. (2010) allowed for the possibility that sites are not perfectly conserved among “all” genomes used in the inference to show that miRNA targeting in CDS is as common as in the 3' UTRs in Drosophila species.
1488) They further predicted 26,000 and 14,000 sites in human 3' UTR and CDS regions, respectively.
1489) Finally, Fang and Rajewsky (2011) found evidence that mRNAs that are simultaneously targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR are slightly more destabilized than mRNA targeted only in the 3' UTR, while Schnall-Levin et al. (2011) showed that mRNAs with several miRNA binding sites in the CDS can effectively be degraded.In the present study we analyzed putative miRNA target sites that are located in coding regions, with the aim of uncovering the function of such sites by comparison with sites that are located in 3' UTRs.
1490) The target sites that we used in our analysis were either predicted computationally or inferred on the basis of transcript- or protein-level changes following miRNA transfections.
1491) On the other hand, sites located in 3' UTR are much more effective at inducing mRNA degradation, as reported before (Baek et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010; Hafner et al. 2010; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).Previous SectionNext SectionResultsBoth CDS and 3' UTR sites are under evolutionary selectionThe application of the ElMMo model to miRNA target prediction in 3' UTRs was described before (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and recent assessments indicate that ElMMo is among the most accurate miRNA target prediction methods available (Alexiou et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Sturm et al. 2010).
1492) To determine whether the ElMMo-predicted CDS sites are functional we analyzed eight published data sets (listed in Table 1) that compared mRNA expression before and after transfections of individual miRNAs.
1495) As Figure 1A (and Supplemental Fig. 1) shows, both CDS and 3' UTR sites that are located in down-regulated transcripts have a higher probability to be under selection compared with sites that are located in transcripts that do not respond to transfection.
1496) In principle, these transcripts were expressed and bound by Argonaute proteins, so the transfected miRNAs should have had access to all seed-matching sites in these transcripts.
1497) These results indicate that ElMMo predicts functional sites not only in 3' UTRs but also in CDSs.View this table:In this window In a new windowTable 1.The data sets that we used to identify properties of functional miRNA binding sites in the 3' UTR and in the CDSFigure 1.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 1.(A) CDS- and 3' UTR-located miRNA binding sites that induce mRNA degradation or are isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are under stronger selection pressure compared with miRNA-complementary sites that were not functional in these experiments; 2274 CDS- and 3956 3' UTR-located sites that induce mRNA degradation are compared with 3513 CDS- and 3268 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce mRNA degradation; 751 CDS- and 786 3' UTR-located sites isolated in EIF2C2 CLIP experiments are compared with 1059 CDS- and 956 3' UTR-located sites that do not induce EIF2C2 binding.
1499) (Dashed red line) First principal component of the scatter.ElMMo further estimates a miRNA-specific probability that a site that is complementary to the miRNA in the reference species (in this case human) is under selection in at least one other species taken into account in the miRNA target prediction.
1503) These results suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites evolve in parallel and that CDS sites must have a function that confers a selective advantage in evolution.miRNAs that function in embryonic development co-target the 3' UTR and the CDSThe proportion of miRNA-complementary sites estimated to be under evolutionary selection in CDS as opposed to 3' UTRs differs between miRNAs (Fig. 2A).
1506) (Red dashed line) Scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites, defined as the line that goes through the origin and maximizes the projected variance.
1507) (B) Scatter plot of the CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting preference of individual miRNAs against the fold enrichment in transcripts that are targeted in both the CDS and 3' UTR relative to what would be expected if the sites were independently distributed.
1509) We then determined the fold enrichments in the number of such co-targeted genes relative to what would be expected if miRNAs targeted the CDS and the 3' UTR independently (see section “Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR” in Methods).
1510) We found significant evidence of CDS and 3' UTR co-targeting for 62 human miRNAs (P < 0.05 at Fisher's exact test after Bonferroni correction; see Supplemental Table 2).
1511) Among these were many miRNAs with important functions: the epithelial cell-specific (Gregory et al. 2008) hsa-miR-141-3p/200a-3p (P < 10-11), the embryonic stem cell-expressed (Suh et al. 2004; Stadler et al. 2010) hsa-miR-302/372/373-3p/520a-3p (P < 10-8), the oncogenic component of the mir-17/92 cluster hsa-miR-19a-3p (P < 10-6) (Ventura et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009), the oncogenic hsa-miR-130b-3p/hsa-miR-301a-3p miRNAs (P < 10-6) (Shi et al. 2011), and the hsa-miR-137 (P < 10-6), that is involved in neural maturation (Smrt et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2011).The tendency for these miRNAs to target both the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual mRNAs cannot be explained by a general tendency of motif co-occurrence in the CDS and 3' UTR of the same transcripts because co-targeting enrichments beyond threefold are very rarely observed for random motifs (Supplemental Fig. 11).
1512) The x-axis shows the preference of the miRNA for CDS vs. 3' UTR targeting defined as the signed distance to the line representing the scaling between the number of CDS and 3' UTR sites (Fig. 2A) for the respective miRNA.
1514) Interestingly, overexpression of most of these CDS/3' UTR-co-targeting miRNAs has been linked with tumorigenesis (Voorhoeve et al. 2006; Huang et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009; Mateescu et al. 2011; Shi et al. 2011).Functional CDS and 3' UTR binding sites have similar sequence and structure propertiesPreviously, we found that miRNA binding sites that are located in 3' UTRs and are effective in mRNA degradation have specific properties such as structural accessibility and a U-rich sequence context (Hausser et al. 2009).
1515) We further found that highly conserved miRNA target sites share these properties, suggesting that miRNA target sites in 3' UTRs have been selected in evolution based on their ability to induce mRNA degradation.
1516) Functional target sites were defined as those that had a high posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or those whose associated transcripts or proteins responded in miRNA transfection experiments (see Methods).
1517) Nonfunctional target sites were defined as those that had a low posterior probability of being under evolutionary selection or whose associated transcripts or proteins did not respond in miRNA transfection experiments.
1518) For each target site, we computed 32 properties that quantify the structure and sequence context of miRNA binding sites (listed in section 1.2 of the Supplemental Material).
1519) In particular, U-rich and structurally accessible environments characterize functional miRNA target sites, irrespective of their location in CDS or 3' UTRs.
1521) Sets of functional and nonfunctional binding sites were defined according to four different criteria—selective pressure, efficacy in mRNA degradation, efficacy in reducing protein levels, and binding to EIF2C2—each corresponding to a different panel.
1522) Positive and negative values denote positive and negative predictors of functional miRNA binding sites, respectively.mRNA destabilization occurs mainly when miRNAs bind to sites in 3' UTRsTo investigate the possible function of CDS-located miRNA target sites, we first compiled, from the miRNA transfection experiments of Linsley et al. (2007) and Grimson et al. (2007), transcripts that satisfied one of the following four mutually exclusive constraints.
1527) Fold changes were normalized to the average fold change of mRNAs that did not contain canonical binding sites to the transfected miRNA.CDS binding sites can effectively inhibit translationAlthough miRNAs significantly reduce the mRNA levels of their targets (Bagga et al. 2005; Lewis et al. 2005), the initial paradigm was that miRNAs inhibit translation without affecting mRNA levels (Lee et al. 1993; Wightman et al. 1993), and the relative contribution of these mechanisms is still a matter of debate (Eulalio et al. 2008; Filipowicz et al. 2008; Béthune et al. 2012; David 2012).
1529) They found that at 32 h post-transfection, the reduction in ribosome occupancy of transcripts with miRNA binding sites in 3' UTRs could be attributed in very large measure (84%) to the reduction in mRNA levels.We asked whether this observation holds equally true for transcripts with miRNA-complementary sites that are located not in the 3' UTR but rather in the CDS.
1531) As shown in Figure 5 and previously reported by Guo et al. (2010), transcripts that are targeted in the 3' UTR are strongly down-regulated at 32 h after transfection, and their ribosome occupancy at this time largely reflects the mRNA level.
1533) This suggests that miRNA binding sites that are located in CDS are effective in inducing translational inhibition immediately after miRNA transfection while sites located in the 3' UTR sites are effective in down-regulating the mRNA levels.Figure 5.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 5.CDS-located binding sites transiently inhibit translation in miRNA transfection experiments.
1536) Fold changes were determined relative to the average fold change of mRNAs with no seed matches.To assess the generality of these findings we revisited the data from a very recent study that investigated the miRNA-induced translational inhibition and mRNA degradation during maternal-zygotic transition in zebrafish (Bazzini et al. 2012).
1540) Finally, we constructed reporters to measure the effect of a miRNA on the protein and mRNA level of miRNA targets with CDS-located target sites.
1541) First, we generated a HEK293T stable cell line containing an episomal pRTS-1 vector from which the expression of hsa-miR-124-3p can be induced with doxycyclin.
1542) We then selected two conserved CDS miR-124 target sites that were represented with a relatively high number of reads in the EIF2C2 (also known as Ago2) CLIP data of Hafner et al. (2010).
1544) As shown in Supplemental Figure 17, wild-type constructs exhibit a reduction in protein expression relative to the mutant constructs that cannot be explained by a corresponding decrease in mRNA levels.
1545) Thus, in human, mouse and zebrafish, CDS-located miRNA binding sites appear to be more effective in translational inhibition than in mRNA degradation.Previous SectionNext SectionDiscussionIn spite of much research, the mechanisms of action and the function of miRNAs are insufficiently understood.
1547) Recent high-throughput studies concluded that the reduction in protein levels upon miRNA expression is largely a consequence of the mRNA degradation induced by miRNAs (Baek et al. 2008; Selbach et al. 2008; Guo et al. 2010), though these initial experiments may have missed an important kinetic aspect (Bazzini et al. 2012).
1548) Another recurrent finding is that changes in target mRNA level upon miRNA transfection or overexpression are small.
1549) How these small effects can confer a selective advantage that is reflected in the strong evolutionary conservation of the target sites remains a puzzle.
1550) This applies especially to target sites located in coding regions, whose effects appear to be substantially smaller compared with those in 3' UTRs (Gu et al. 2009; Hafner et al. 2010; Schnall-Levin et al. 2010, 2011; Fang and Rajewsky 2011).
1551) We thus predicted miRNA binding sites in CDS and used them to comparatively investigate the properties and effects of miRNA-complementary sites that are located in the coding domain or in the 3' UTR.
1553) These findings suggest that CDS and 3' UTR sites function through similar mechanisms and have a comparable impact on gene expression.Simultaneous measurement of mRNA and protein levels is nontrivial for a variety of reasons.
1554) Furthermore, proteomics measurements require that the proteins are labeled and this imposes constraints on the timing of miRNA transfection (or induction of expression).
1556) For the first time, our analysis of such data reveals an effect that CDS-located miRNA binding sites are capable of inducing more effectively than 3' UTR-located sites, namely a rapid reduction in mRNA translation.
1559) Thus, transient expression of the miRNA is probably not an explanation in this case, although it cannot be entirely ruled out because dre-miR-430 may be displaced from the RNA-induced silencing complex by other miRNAs at later time points.Interestingly, in both the zebrafish system and our reporter system, some mRNAs with miRNA binding sites in coding regions appear to be up-regulated upon miRNA expression.
1560) This may reflect another unsuspected complexity of the kinetics of miRNA-dependent gene regulation (Bazzini et al. 2012; Béthune et al. 2012; Djuranovic et al. 2012).
1561) In the Bazzini et al. (2012) data, however, what is observed is preferential stabilization of known dre-miR-430 targets, which suggests either a direct involvement of miRNA-dependent regulation or an indirect correlation caused by the overlap between the set of mRNAs that undergo polyadenylation changes in development and the set of dre-miR-430 targets.
1565) On one side of the spectrum are miRNAs expressed in the embryonic cells and miRNAs of the miR-17-92 cluster, that target predominantly 3' UTRs, but also show the strongest enrichment in CDS–3' UTR co-targeting.
1567) These miRNAs appear to preferentially bind to CDS-located sites, which we found to be effective in rapid inhibition of translation.
1568) Future work will determine the magnitude and timing of gene repression induced by miRNAs binding to the coding regions to uncover new aspects of miRNA biology.Previous SectionNext SectionMethodsEstimation of the selection pressure on CDS and 3' UTR target sitesIn a previous study, we introduced the ElMMo model for inferring miRNA target sites based on comparative genomics data (Gaidatzis et al. 2007).
1569) ElMMo is parameter-free, requiring only a set of miRNA-complementary, putative sites in a reference species and pairwise genome alignments between the reference species and other species.
1570) ElMMo predicts miRNA target site by estimating the selection pressure on motifs that are complementary to specific miRNAs, relative to a “background” set of motifs that do not correspond to miRNAs.
1571) By simply changing the type of sequences in the input data set (coding regions or 3' UTRs), ElMMo thus allows us to independently estimate the selection pressure on binding sites for individual miRNAs in CDS and 3' UTRs, respectively.
1572) We used human as the reference species, and the RefSeq data set of human transcripts downloaded from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) as the set of transcripts in which we predicted target sites.Processing of quantitative proteomics, microarrays, and deep sequencing datamRNA sequences, gene to mRNA mappings, mRNA to protein mappings, representative mRNAWe used the RefSeq mRNA database that we downloaded from NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) on Jan 18th 2011 for all analyses described in this manuscript.
1574) For the analysis, we only considered 10,222 genes with nonzero expression levels in all experimental conditions (mock, hsa-miR-155-5p, and hsa-miR-1 transfections/mRNA and rpf sequencing/0, 12, and 32 h after transfection).To investigate the effect of the transfected miRNAs on mRNA stability and translation, we first computed the log2 fold change in rpf and mRNA expression upon miRNA transfection compared with mock transfection.
1575) mRNAs were then divided into four subsets: those with no binding sites to the transfected miRNA, those with exactly one binding site located in the 3' UTR, those with exactly one binding site located in the CDS, and mRNAs with two binding sites in the CDS.
1576) The overall effect of the transfected miRNA on rpf and mRNA levels was estimated by subtracting the log2 fold change of mRNAs without binding sites from that of mRNAs with binding sites (defined as above).
1579) HEK293 miRNA profiles were determined from the two mild MNase digestion EIF2C2 CLIP samples of Kishore et al. (2011), using the methodology described in that paper.mRNA site extraction from the EIF2C2 CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)Outline of the statistical modelFor each of the c sites yielded by the CLIP experiment, we compare the observed number of CLIP reads ri with the number of reads expected under a background model in which the number of reads per CLIP site depends only on the abundance of the corresponding mRNA.
1580) We neglect biases related to sequence accessibility, sequence composition, etc. Instead, we will focus on how CLIP sites located on mRNAs of different abundance are sampled in a thought experiment in which all CLIP sites are equally prone to bind the RNA-binding protein of interest and generate reads.Estimating mRNA frequencies from mRNAseq dataLet us assume there are m genes, expressing different mRNAs.
1589) By applying the same reasoning to P(ri|r, H0), one can show the denominator of Equation 7 to beFormula(11)Finally, substituting Equations 10 and 11 into Equation 7 gives a simple expression for the posterior probability P(H1|r, ri) that the number of CLIP reads ri mapping to site i is larger than what would be expected given the abundance of the mRNA alone:Formulawhich is the reverse cumulative probability of a Beta distribution.To obtain binding sites, 40-nt windows are ranked by decreasing posterior probability first, and in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment ratios Graphic.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sitesData sets used in the analysisThe microarray and deep-sequencing data for the following references were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accessions GSE6838 and GSE8501 for Linsley et al. (2007), GSE14537 for Hausser et al. (2009), GSE11968 for Baek et al. (2008), GDS1858 for Grimson et al. (2007), GSE22004 for Guo et al. (2010), and GSE28865 for Kishore et al. (2011).
1591) Finally, predictions of miRNA binding sites under selection pressure are available as flat files from http://www.mirz.unibas.ch/miRNAtargetPredictionBulk.php.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional miRNA binding sites from combined miRNA perturbation and microarray experimentsAmong the mRNA profiling data sets that we reanalyzed, the experiments performed by Grimson et al. (2007), Baek et al. (2008), Selbach et al. (2008), and Guo et al. (2010) did not feature biological replicates.
1595) Not knowing the distribution of the severity of the effect that miRNAs have on the expression of their targets we assumed as little as possible about the distribution Pk(f | +), namely that a true target must change expression in the right direction, i.e., f < 0 for a miRNA overexpression experiment, and that expression changes are limited to a finite range over which the expression change has a “uniform” distribution.
1596) Finally, based on these distributions, we estimated the posterior probability that a transcript with fold change f was a functional target in a given experiment.To obtain nonfunctional binding sites, we selected those transcripts with the smallest sum of squared log2 fold changes in the biological replicates.
1597) Finally, for the purpose of comparing the properties of functional and nonfunctional sites, we proceeded as with experiments where no replicates were performed: We selected 250 functional sites and 250 nonfunctional sites according to the criteria defined above and we discarded those cases in which the seed match was in the 5' UTR.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from ElMMo predictionsFrom our predictions of miRNA target sites under evolutionary selection (Gaidatzis et al. 2007) and for each of the experimentally tested and evolutionarily conserved miRNAs (hsa-miR-30a-5p, hsa-let-7c, hsa-miR-155-5p, hsa-miR-1, hsa-miR-103-3p, hsa-miR-15a-5p, hsa-miR-16-5p, hsa-miR-106b-5p, hsa-miR-20a-5p, hsa-miR-141-3p, hsa-miR-200a-3p, hsa-miR-181a-5p, hsa-miR-124-3p and hsa-miR-17-5p), we selected the top 250 target sites in the order of their posterior probability of being under selection.
1599) This procedure was applied to the 3' UTR and CDS ElMMo miRNA target site predictions separately.Extraction of functional and nonfunctional sites from CLIP experiments of Kishore et al. (2011)The 40-nt windows were sorted by decreasing posterior probability, and, in the case of ties, by decreasing enrichment in CLIP reads (see “mRNA site extraction from EIF2C2 CLIP experiments” in Methods).
1600) Finally, CDS binding sites were obtained in a similar fashion from windows located in coding domains.Properties definition and computationFor data sets in which the effect could not be unambiguously attributed to a single site (all data sets other than those derived by CLIP and comparative genomic analysis), we only analyzed mRNAs that had precisely one canonical miRNA seed match (7mer-A1, 7mer-m8, or 8mer).
1601) For each individual putative target site we then computed 32 sequence and structure properties, described in detail in the Supplemental Methods and Hausser et al. (2009).Enrichments in the number of genes co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTRTo determine whether individual miRNAs tend to target the same genes in the CDS and in the 3' UTR more than expected by chance, we determined, for each miRNA, the number c11 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 CDS and at least one of the 250 top 3' UTR binding sites predicted by ElMMo.
1602) Similarly, we determined the number c01 of genes containing at least one of the top 250 predicted 3' UTR binding sites but none of the top 250 predicted CDS binding sites.Under the hypothesis that miRNAs target the CDS and 3' UTR independently, we expect a fraction Graphic of all mRNAs to be co-targeted in the CDS and in the 3' UTR, where n = 18,430 is the number of representative mRNAs used in the analysis.
1607) B.B. was supported by a Werner Siemens fellowship.Author contributions: M.Z. and J.H. designed the research, J.H. and B.B. performed analyses, A.P.S. performed the experiments, A.P.S. and J.H. analyzed the data, J.H. and M.Z. wrote the paper with the help of B.B. and A.P.S.Previous SectionNext SectionFootnotes?1 Corresponding authorsE-mail jean.hausser@unibas.chE-mail mihaela.zavolan@unibas.ch[Supplemental material is available for this article.]Article published online before print.
1608) Article, supplemental material, and publication date are at http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.139758.112.Freely available online through the Genome Research Open Access option.Received February 28, 2012.Accepted January 16, 2013.© 2013, Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressThis article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genome.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml).
1625) A few examples of crosstalk between RNA-binding proteins and the miRNA pathway have been described (Bhattacharyya et al. 2006; Kedde et al. 2007; Kedde and Agami 2008; Kim et al. 2009) and more are likely to emerge in the future.Finally, different families of miRNAs that are broadly expressed but are active in different contexts show distinct preferences for the CDS or 3' UTR.
1626) On the other hand, motifs that are complementary to miRNAs with embryonic expression—hsa-miR-302a-3p, hsa-miR-369-3p, hsa-miR-372, hsa-miR-373-3p, hsa-miR-374b/c-5p (Suh et al. 2004), the homologs of which have been shown to be involved in maternal mRNA clearance in zebrafish (Giraldez et al. 2006)—or to the oncogenic miRNAs of the miR-17 family—hsa-miR-17-5p, hsa-miR-20a/b-5p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-106a/b-5p (He et al. 2005)—are more frequent in the 3' UTRs (see also Supplemental Table 1).Figure 2.View larger version:In this page In a new windowDownload as PowerPoint SlideFigure 2.Individual miRNAs differ in their preference for targeting the CDS and the 3' UTR as well as in their tendency to simultaneously target the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual genes.
1627) Among these were many miRNAs with important functions: the epithelial cell-specific (Gregory et al. 2008) hsa-miR-141-3p/200a-3p (P < 10-11), the embryonic stem cell-expressed (Suh et al. 2004; Stadler et al. 2010) hsa-miR-302/372/373-3p/520a-3p (P < 10-8), the oncogenic component of the mir-17/92 cluster hsa-miR-19a-3p (P < 10-6) (Ventura et al. 2008; Olive et al. 2009), the oncogenic hsa-miR-130b-3p/hsa-miR-301a-3p miRNAs (P < 10-6) (Shi et al. 2011), and the hsa-miR-137 (P < 10-6), that is involved in neural maturation (Smrt et al. 2010; Sun et al. 2011).The tendency for these miRNAs to target both the CDS and the 3' UTR of individual mRNAs cannot be explained by a general tendency of motif co-occurrence in the CDS and 3' UTR of the same transcripts because co-targeting enrichments beyond threefold are very rarely observed for random motifs (Supplemental Fig. 11).
1628) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
1630) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
1631) Pinto,2,3 and Akhilesh Pandey1Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at ProteomicsSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:AbstractMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
1632) Given the extensive involvement of miRNA in physiology, dysregulation of miRNA expression can be associated with cancer pathobiology including oncogenesis [11], proliferation [12], epithelial-mesenchymal transition [13], metastasis [14], aberrations in metabolism [15], and angiogenesis [16], among others.
1633) This has been made possible by the use of established methodologies such as gene expression microarrays, next generation sequencing, computational prediction of miRNA targets, and mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches [26].
1634) Thus, it should be noted that miRNA target prediction by computational methods alone is not sufficient and it becomes essential to experimentally identify and validate targets of miRNAs.2.2 Importance of proteomics in understanding miRNA biologyOne of the mechanisms by which miRNA regulates gene expression is by repressing translation without mRNA degradation [30,31].
1635) Determining the mRNA expression levels is not ideal for identifying targets as mRNA levels do not necessarily correlate with the levels of protein expression [32–34].
1639) Baek et al. measured the effects of addition of miRNAs such as miR-124, a brain specific miRNA, miR-1, and miR-181 on the expression levels of proteins in HeLa cells.
1641) Kaller et al. employed pSILAC and microarray analysis to study the effects of miR-34a, an important mediator of p53-mediated tumor suppressor activities on mRNA and proteome expression [69].
1643) They first adopted a conditional suppression system of Wnt signaling and identified miR-145, miR-126, miR-30e-3p, and miR-139–5p as critical regulators for their ectopic expression causing growth inhibition.
1644) However, these approaches do not measure the protein expression level of the direct targets.
1648) Sekine S, Ogawa R, Ito R, Hiraoka N, et al. Disruption of Dicer1 induces dysregulated fetal gene expression and promotes hepatocarcinogenesis.
1650) Muniyappa MK, Dowling P, Henry M, Meleady P, et al. MiRNA-29a regulates the expression of numerous proteins and reduces the invasiveness and proliferation of human carcinoma cell lines.
1652) The use of quantitative proteomic strategies has also emerged as a key technique for experimental identification of miRNA targets by allowing direct determination of proteins whose levels are altered because of translational suppression.
1655) Genes encoding miRNAs are transcribed as pri-miRNAs by RNA polymerase II and processed by the microprocessor complex consisting of Drosha and ...The vast majority of studies on miRNA biology thus far have primarily focused on two aspects: elucidating mechanisms of miRNA-mediated posttranscriptional gene regulation and identifying targets of miRNAs.
1656) This has been made possible by the use of established methodologies such as gene expression microarrays, next generation sequencing, computational prediction of miRNA targets, and mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches [26].
1657) In this article, we will highlight the importance and advantages of proteomics to decipher the role of miRNA in regulating biological processes.Go to:2 Approaches for computational analysis and proteomics2.1 Computational approaches to predict miRNA targetsA large majority of reports describing identification of miRNA targets are based on computational approaches or detection of altered mRNA levels.
1658) However, the mechanism of target recognition is still not fully understood and as a result the algorithms that are employed for target gene prediction are not accurate and often overpredict miRNA targets.
1659) Numerous web-based miRNA target prediction tools such as TargetScan (www.targetscan.org), miRanda (www.microrna.org), TarBase (diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr), PicTar (pictar.mdcberlin.de), RNA22 (cbcsrv.watson.ibm.com/rna22.html), mirWIP (ambroslab.org), PITA (genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_dyn_data.html), and miRDB (mirdb.org) predict miRNA targets based on selection criteria such as sequence pairing (which involves perfect or nearly perfect complementarity between nucleotides 2 and 8 at the 5′ end of miRNA (seed sequence) to the mRNA target site), secondary structure modeling, free energy calculation, and comparative genomic sequence conservation.
1660) Thus, it should be noted that miRNA target prediction by computational methods alone is not sufficient and it becomes essential to experimentally identify and validate targets of miRNAs.2.2 Importance of proteomics in understanding miRNA biologyOne of the mechanisms by which miRNA regulates gene expression is by repressing translation without mRNA degradation [30,31].
1661) Determining the mRNA expression levels is not ideal for identifying targets as mRNA levels do not necessarily correlate with the levels of protein expression [32–34].
1662) Apart from labeling-based methods, a semiquantitative strategy, less frequently used, is based on differential spot analysis by two-dimensional electrophoresis [41–43].In recent years, there has been significant progress in the development and application of technologies for targeted analysis of peptides in complex protein samples.
1667) Similar quantitative proteomics strategies need to be employed in the future to increase our depth of understanding the components involved in the canonical and noncanonical miRNA processing pathways.3.4 Identification of miRNA targets using quantitative proteomicsA complete delineation of the miRNA targeting mechanism entails concurrent measurement of mRNAs and their protein products.
1676) In the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis coupled with mass spectrometry, half of the differentially regulated proteins were found to be miR-34a targets and shown belong to p53 signaling pathway [43].Although these studies have led to identification of many novel miRNA candidate targets, a clear distinction between direct and indirect targets is lacking.
1678) However, these approaches do not measure the protein expression level of the direct targets.
1683) Fang R, Xiao T, Fang Z, Sun Y, et al. miR-143 regulates cancer glycolysis via targeting hexokinase 2.
1687) Nelson PT, Wang WX, Mao G, Wilfred BR, et al. Specific sequence determinants of miR-15/107 microRNA gene group targets.
1692) The developmental timing regulator AIN-1 interacts with miRISCs and may target the argonaute protein ALG-1 to cytoplasmic P bodies in C. elegans.
1693) Landthaler M, Gaidatzis D, Rothballer A, Chen PY, et al. Molecular characterization of human Argonaute-containing ribonucleo protein complexes and their bound target mRNAs.
1697) Schepeler T, Holm A, Halvey P, Nordentoft I, et al. Attenuation of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in colorectal cancer cells induces several growth-suppressive microRNAs that target cancer promoting genes.
1701) MicroRNA-21 targets the tumor suppressor gene tropomyosin 1 (TPM1) J Biol Chem.
1709) Takei Y, Takigahira M, Mihara K, Tarumi Y, et al. The metastasis-associated microRNA miR-516a-3p is a novel therapeutic target for inhibiting peritoneal dissemination of human scirrhous gastric cancer.
1711) Kaller et al. employed pSILAC and microarray analysis to study the effects of miR-34a, an important mediator of p53-mediated tumor suppressor activities on mRNA and proteome expression [69].
1712) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
1713) Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
1714) Schliekelman MJ, Gibbons DL, Faca VM, Creighton CJ, et al. Targets of the tumor suppressor miR-200 in regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer.
1715) MicroRNA-21 targets the tumor suppressor gene tropomyosin 1 (TPM1) J Biol Chem.
1716) Given the extensive involvement of miRNA in physiology, dysregulation of miRNA expression can be associated with cancer pathobiology including oncogenesis [11], proliferation [12], epithelial-mesenchymal transition [13], metastasis [14], aberrations in metabolism [15], and angiogenesis [16], among others.
1720) Schliekelman et al. use SILAC to determine which proteins are regulated by miR-200 family to cause the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer.
1721) Another network-revealing study about cancer biology was conducted by Cheng et al., who transfected miR-34a in a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.
1723) Fang R, Xiao T, Fang Z, Sun Y, et al. miR-143 regulates cancer glycolysis via targeting hexokinase 2.
1725) Schliekelman MJ, Gibbons DL, Faca VM, Creighton CJ, et al. Targets of the tumor suppressor miR-200 in regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer.
1726) Schepeler T, Holm A, Halvey P, Nordentoft I, et al. Attenuation of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in colorectal cancer cells induces several growth-suppressive microRNAs that target cancer promoting genes.
1728) Yan GR, Xu SH, Tan ZL, Liu L, et al. Global identification of miR-373-regulated genes in breast cancer by quantitative proteomics.
1729) Takei Y, Takigahira M, Mihara K, Tarumi Y, et al. The metastasis-associated microRNA miR-516a-3p is a novel therapeutic target for inhibiting peritoneal dissemination of human scirrhous gastric cancer.
1730) Pinto,2,3 and Akhilesh Pandey1Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at ProteomicsSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:AbstractMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
1731) miRNAs impose this layer of posttranscriptional gene regulation on a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from gametogenesis [6], development [7], and tissue repair [8] to aging [9].
1732) This widespread regulation reflected in the fact that up to ~60% of the human protein-coding genes are potentially modulated by miRNAs [10].
1733) Given the extensive involvement of miRNA in physiology, dysregulation of miRNA expression can be associated with cancer pathobiology including oncogenesis [11], proliferation [12], epithelial-mesenchymal transition [13], metastasis [14], aberrations in metabolism [15], and angiogenesis [16], among others.
1735) Genes encoding miRNAs are transcribed as pri-miRNAs by RNA polymerase II and processed by the microprocessor complex consisting of Drosha and ...The vast majority of studies on miRNA biology thus far have primarily focused on two aspects: elucidating mechanisms of miRNA-mediated posttranscriptional gene regulation and identifying targets of miRNAs.
1736) This has been made possible by the use of established methodologies such as gene expression microarrays, next generation sequencing, computational prediction of miRNA targets, and mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches [26].
1737) However, the mechanism of target recognition is still not fully understood and as a result the algorithms that are employed for target gene prediction are not accurate and often overpredict miRNA targets.
1739) Thus, it should be noted that miRNA target prediction by computational methods alone is not sufficient and it becomes essential to experimentally identify and validate targets of miRNAs.2.2 Importance of proteomics in understanding miRNA biologyOne of the mechanisms by which miRNA regulates gene expression is by repressing translation without mRNA degradation [30,31].
1740) Furthermore, a recent study revealed that the efficiency of miRNA-mediated gene silencing can be downregulated by poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation of Argonaute/RISC, suggesting that the mere presence of miRNA does not necessarily reduce the protein production [35].
1743) In a recent study, Iliopoulos et al. carried out microRNA profiling and reverse-phase protein microarray analysis on the same patient-derived osteoarthritic cartilage to identify genes involved in osteoarthritic pathogenesis.
1757) Brennecke J, Hipfner DR, Stark A, Russell RB, et al. Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila.
1760) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
1761) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
1762) Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
1766) Nelson PT, Wang WX, Mao G, Wilfred BR, et al. Specific sequence determinants of miR-15/107 microRNA gene group targets.
1771) Sekine S, Ogawa R, Ito R, Hiraoka N, et al. Disruption of Dicer1 induces dysregulated fetal gene expression and promotes hepatocarcinogenesis.
1772) Schepeler T, Holm A, Halvey P, Nordentoft I, et al. Attenuation of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in colorectal cancer cells induces several growth-suppressive microRNAs that target cancer promoting genes.
1774) MicroRNA-21 targets the tumor suppressor gene tropomyosin 1 (TPM1) J Biol Chem.
1775) Yan GR, Xu SH, Tan ZL, Liu L, et al. Global identification of miR-373-regulated genes in breast cancer by quantitative proteomics.
1776) Numerous web-based miRNA target prediction tools such as TargetScan (www.targetscan.org), miRanda (www.microrna.org), TarBase (diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr), PicTar (pictar.mdcberlin.de), RNA22 (cbcsrv.watson.ibm.com/rna22.html), mirWIP (ambroslab.org), PITA (genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_dyn_data.html), and miRDB (mirdb.org) predict miRNA targets based on selection criteria such as sequence pairing (which involves perfect or nearly perfect complementarity between nucleotides 2 and 8 at the 5′ end of miRNA (seed sequence) to the mRNA target site), secondary structure modeling, free energy calculation, and comparative genomic sequence conservation.
1779) Mechanism of translational regulation by miR-2 from sites in the 5′ untranslated region or the open reading frame.
1781) Pinto,2,3 and Akhilesh Pandey1Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at ProteomicsSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:AbstractMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
1784) miRNAs impose this layer of posttranscriptional gene regulation on a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from gametogenesis [6], development [7], and tissue repair [8] to aging [9].
1785) This widespread regulation reflected in the fact that up to ~60% of the human protein-coding genes are potentially modulated by miRNAs [10].
1786) Given the extensive involvement of miRNA in physiology, dysregulation of miRNA expression can be associated with cancer pathobiology including oncogenesis [11], proliferation [12], epithelial-mesenchymal transition [13], metastasis [14], aberrations in metabolism [15], and angiogenesis [16], among others.
1787) Genes encoding miRNAs are transcribed as pri-miRNAs by RNA polymerase II and processed by the microprocessor complex consisting of Drosha and ...The vast majority of studies on miRNA biology thus far have primarily focused on two aspects: elucidating mechanisms of miRNA-mediated posttranscriptional gene regulation and identifying targets of miRNAs.
1788) In this article, we will highlight the importance and advantages of proteomics to decipher the role of miRNA in regulating biological processes.Go to:2 Approaches for computational analysis and proteomics2.1 Computational approaches to predict miRNA targetsA large majority of reports describing identification of miRNA targets are based on computational approaches or detection of altered mRNA levels.
1789) Thus, it should be noted that miRNA target prediction by computational methods alone is not sufficient and it becomes essential to experimentally identify and validate targets of miRNAs.2.2 Importance of proteomics in understanding miRNA biologyOne of the mechanisms by which miRNA regulates gene expression is by repressing translation without mRNA degradation [30,31].
1790) Furthermore, a recent study revealed that the efficiency of miRNA-mediated gene silencing can be downregulated by poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation of Argonaute/RISC, suggesting that the mere presence of miRNA does not necessarily reduce the protein production [35].
1791) These include profiling immune response to infection, protein–protein interactions, protein–nucleic acid interactions and signaling pathways and have also been utilized to understand the mechanism of miRNA regulation.
1793) To delineate the regulation of pri-miRNA processing, Tang et al. examined the mechanism by which Drosha, one of the key enzymes in the miRNA processing machinery, localizes to the nucleus.
1795) They applied this strategy to study the protein regulatory mechanisms by miRNAs.
1796) Schliekelman et al. use SILAC to determine which proteins are regulated by miR-200 family to cause the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer.
1797) They first adopted a conditional suppression system of Wnt signaling and identified miR-145, miR-126, miR-30e-3p, and miR-139–5p as critical regulators for their ectopic expression causing growth inhibition.
1798) In the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis coupled with mass spectrometry, half of the differentially regulated proteins were found to be miR-34a targets and shown belong to p53 signaling pathway [43].Although these studies have led to identification of many novel miRNA candidate targets, a clear distinction between direct and indirect targets is lacking.
1800) Brennecke J, Hipfner DR, Stark A, Russell RB, et al. Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila.
1801) Fang R, Xiao T, Fang Z, Sun Y, et al. miR-143 regulates cancer glycolysis via targeting hexokinase 2.
1802) Mechanism of translational regulation by miR-2 from sites in the 5′ untranslated region or the open reading frame.
1804) The developmental timing regulator AIN-1 interacts with miRISCs and may target the argonaute protein ALG-1 to cytoplasmic P bodies in C. elegans.
1806) Sekine S, Ogawa R, Ito R, Hiraoka N, et al. Disruption of Dicer1 induces dysregulated fetal gene expression and promotes hepatocarcinogenesis.
1808) Schliekelman MJ, Gibbons DL, Faca VM, Creighton CJ, et al. Targets of the tumor suppressor miR-200 in regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in cancer.
1810) Muniyappa MK, Dowling P, Henry M, Meleady P, et al. MiRNA-29a regulates the expression of numerous proteins and reduces the invasiveness and proliferation of human carcinoma cell lines.
1812) Yan GR, Xu SH, Tan ZL, Liu L, et al. Global identification of miR-373-regulated genes in breast cancer by quantitative proteomics.
1813) Pinto,2,3 and Akhilesh Pandey1Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at ProteomicsSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:AbstractMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
1814) In this article, we will highlight the importance and advantages of proteomics to decipher the role of miRNA in regulating biological processes.Go to:2 Approaches for computational analysis and proteomics2.1 Computational approaches to predict miRNA targetsA large majority of reports describing identification of miRNA targets are based on computational approaches or detection of altered mRNA levels.
1864) Numerous web-based miRNA target prediction tools such as TargetScan (www.targetscan.org), miRanda (www.microrna.org), TarBase (diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr), PicTar (pictar.mdcberlin.de), RNA22 (cbcsrv.watson.ibm.com/rna22.html), mirWIP (ambroslab.org), PITA (genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_dyn_data.html), and miRDB (mirdb.org) predict miRNA targets based on selection criteria such as sequence pairing (which involves perfect or nearly perfect complementarity between nucleotides 2 and 8 at the 5′ end of miRNA (seed sequence) to the mRNA target site), secondary structure modeling, free energy calculation, and comparative genomic sequence conservation.
1916) Numerous web-based miRNA target prediction tools such as TargetScan (www.targetscan.org), miRanda (www.microrna.org), TarBase (diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr), PicTar (pictar.mdcberlin.de), RNA22 (cbcsrv.watson.ibm.com/rna22.html), mirWIP (ambroslab.org), PITA (genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_dyn_data.html), and miRDB (mirdb.org) predict miRNA targets based on selection criteria such as sequence pairing (which involves perfect or nearly perfect complementarity between nucleotides 2 and 8 at the 5′ end of miRNA (seed sequence) to the mRNA target site), secondary structure modeling, free energy calculation, and comparative genomic sequence conservation.
1917) The use of quantitative proteomic strategies has also emerged as a key technique for experimental identification of miRNA targets by allowing direct determination of proteins whose levels are altered because of translational suppression.
1918) This widespread regulation reflected in the fact that up to ~60% of the human protein-coding genes are potentially modulated by miRNAs [10].
1920) Determining the mRNA expression levels is not ideal for identifying targets as mRNA levels do not necessarily correlate with the levels of protein expression [32–34].
1922) Furthermore, a recent study revealed that the efficiency of miRNA-mediated gene silencing can be downregulated by poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation of Argonaute/RISC, suggesting that the mere presence of miRNA does not necessarily reduce the protein production [35].
1923) Therefore, the abundance of mRNA/miRNA species does not serve as the best surrogate marker for biological activity of these proteins.
1930) Apart from labeling-based methods, a semiquantitative strategy, less frequently used, is based on differential spot analysis by two-dimensional electrophoresis [41–43].In recent years, there has been significant progress in the development and application of technologies for targeted analysis of peptides in complex protein samples.
1933) These include profiling immune response to infection, protein–protein interactions, protein–nucleic acid interactions and signaling pathways and have also been utilized to understand the mechanism of miRNA regulation.
1934) In a recent study, Iliopoulos et al. carried out microRNA profiling and reverse-phase protein microarray analysis on the same patient-derived osteoarthritic cartilage to identify genes involved in osteoarthritic pathogenesis.
1940) Similar quantitative proteomics strategies need to be employed in the future to increase our depth of understanding the components involved in the canonical and noncanonical miRNA processing pathways.3.4 Identification of miRNA targets using quantitative proteomicsA complete delineation of the miRNA targeting mechanism entails concurrent measurement of mRNAs and their protein products.
1941) Baek et al. measured the effects of addition of miRNAs such as miR-124, a brain specific miRNA, miR-1, and miR-181 on the expression levels of proteins in HeLa cells.
1945) They applied this strategy to study the protein regulatory mechanisms by miRNAs.
1946) Schliekelman et al. use SILAC to determine which proteins are regulated by miR-200 family to cause the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer.
1947) In the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis coupled with mass spectrometry, half of the differentially regulated proteins were found to be miR-34a targets and shown belong to p53 signaling pathway [43].Although these studies have led to identification of many novel miRNA candidate targets, a clear distinction between direct and indirect targets is lacking.
1948) However, these approaches do not measure the protein expression level of the direct targets.
1958) The developmental timing regulator AIN-1 interacts with miRISCs and may target the argonaute protein ALG-1 to cytoplasmic P bodies in C. elegans.
1959) Landthaler M, Gaidatzis D, Rothballer A, Chen PY, et al. Molecular characterization of human Argonaute-containing ribonucleo protein complexes and their bound target mRNAs.
1968) Muniyappa MK, Dowling P, Henry M, Meleady P, et al. MiRNA-29a regulates the expression of numerous proteins and reduces the invasiveness and proliferation of human carcinoma cell lines.
1973) This widespread regulation reflected in the fact that up to ~60% of the human protein-coding genes are potentially modulated by miRNAs [10].
1976) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
1980) Landthaler M, Gaidatzis D, Rothballer A, Chen PY, et al. Molecular characterization of human Argonaute-containing ribonucleo protein complexes and their bound target mRNAs.
1983) Muniyappa MK, Dowling P, Henry M, Meleady P, et al. MiRNA-29a regulates the expression of numerous proteins and reduces the invasiveness and proliferation of human carcinoma cell lines.
1985) Takei Y, Takigahira M, Mihara K, Tarumi Y, et al. The metastasis-associated microRNA miR-516a-3p is a novel therapeutic target for inhibiting peritoneal dissemination of human scirrhous gastric cancer.
1986) Brennecke J, Hipfner DR, Stark A, Russell RB, et al. Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila.
1989) To delineate the regulation of pri-miRNA processing, Tang et al. examined the mechanism by which Drosha, one of the key enzymes in the miRNA processing machinery, localizes to the nucleus.
1990) Similar quantitative proteomics strategies need to be employed in the future to increase our depth of understanding the components involved in the canonical and noncanonical miRNA processing pathways.3.4 Identification of miRNA targets using quantitative proteomicsA complete delineation of the miRNA targeting mechanism entails concurrent measurement of mRNAs and their protein products.
1991) Another network-revealing study about cancer biology was conducted by Cheng et al., who transfected miR-34a in a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.
1994) Muniyappa MK, Dowling P, Henry M, Meleady P, et al. MiRNA-29a regulates the expression of numerous proteins and reduces the invasiveness and proliferation of human carcinoma cell lines.
1996) The use of quantitative proteomic strategies has also emerged as a key technique for experimental identification of miRNA targets by allowing direct determination of proteins whose levels are altered because of translational suppression.
1997) miRNAs impose this layer of posttranscriptional gene regulation on a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from gametogenesis [6], development [7], and tissue repair [8] to aging [9].
1998) This widespread regulation reflected in the fact that up to ~60% of the human protein-coding genes are potentially modulated by miRNAs [10].
2001) Genes encoding miRNAs are transcribed as pri-miRNAs by RNA polymerase II and processed by the microprocessor complex consisting of Drosha and ...The vast majority of studies on miRNA biology thus far have primarily focused on two aspects: elucidating mechanisms of miRNA-mediated posttranscriptional gene regulation and identifying targets of miRNAs.
2002) This has been made possible by the use of established methodologies such as gene expression microarrays, next generation sequencing, computational prediction of miRNA targets, and mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches [26].
2004) In this article, we will highlight the importance and advantages of proteomics to decipher the role of miRNA in regulating biological processes.Go to:2 Approaches for computational analysis and proteomics2.1 Computational approaches to predict miRNA targetsA large majority of reports describing identification of miRNA targets are based on computational approaches or detection of altered mRNA levels.
2005) However, the mechanism of target recognition is still not fully understood and as a result the algorithms that are employed for target gene prediction are not accurate and often overpredict miRNA targets.
2006) Numerous web-based miRNA target prediction tools such as TargetScan (www.targetscan.org), miRanda (www.microrna.org), TarBase (diana.cslab.ece.ntua.gr), PicTar (pictar.mdcberlin.de), RNA22 (cbcsrv.watson.ibm.com/rna22.html), mirWIP (ambroslab.org), PITA (genie.weizmann.ac.il/pubs/mir07/mir07_dyn_data.html), and miRDB (mirdb.org) predict miRNA targets based on selection criteria such as sequence pairing (which involves perfect or nearly perfect complementarity between nucleotides 2 and 8 at the 5′ end of miRNA (seed sequence) to the mRNA target site), secondary structure modeling, free energy calculation, and comparative genomic sequence conservation.
2008) Thus, it should be noted that miRNA target prediction by computational methods alone is not sufficient and it becomes essential to experimentally identify and validate targets of miRNAs.2.2 Importance of proteomics in understanding miRNA biologyOne of the mechanisms by which miRNA regulates gene expression is by repressing translation without mRNA degradation [30,31].
2009) Determining the mRNA expression levels is not ideal for identifying targets as mRNA levels do not necessarily correlate with the levels of protein expression [32–34].
2010) Furthermore, a recent study revealed that the efficiency of miRNA-mediated gene silencing can be downregulated by poly (ADP-ribosyl)ation of Argonaute/RISC, suggesting that the mere presence of miRNA does not necessarily reduce the protein production [35].
2011) Therefore, the abundance of mRNA/miRNA species does not serve as the best surrogate marker for biological activity of these proteins.
2021) Apart from labeling-based methods, a semiquantitative strategy, less frequently used, is based on differential spot analysis by two-dimensional electrophoresis [41–43].In recent years, there has been significant progress in the development and application of technologies for targeted analysis of peptides in complex protein samples.
2024) These include profiling immune response to infection, protein–protein interactions, protein–nucleic acid interactions and signaling pathways and have also been utilized to understand the mechanism of miRNA regulation.
2025) In a recent study, Iliopoulos et al. carried out microRNA profiling and reverse-phase protein microarray analysis on the same patient-derived osteoarthritic cartilage to identify genes involved in osteoarthritic pathogenesis.
2034) To delineate the regulation of pri-miRNA processing, Tang et al. examined the mechanism by which Drosha, one of the key enzymes in the miRNA processing machinery, localizes to the nucleus.
2039) Similar quantitative proteomics strategies need to be employed in the future to increase our depth of understanding the components involved in the canonical and noncanonical miRNA processing pathways.3.4 Identification of miRNA targets using quantitative proteomicsA complete delineation of the miRNA targeting mechanism entails concurrent measurement of mRNAs and their protein products.
2041) Baek et al. measured the effects of addition of miRNAs such as miR-124, a brain specific miRNA, miR-1, and miR-181 on the expression levels of proteins in HeLa cells.
2045) They applied this strategy to study the protein regulatory mechanisms by miRNAs.
2046) Kaller et al. employed pSILAC and microarray analysis to study the effects of miR-34a, an important mediator of p53-mediated tumor suppressor activities on mRNA and proteome expression [69].
2048) They first adopted a conditional suppression system of Wnt signaling and identified miR-145, miR-126, miR-30e-3p, and miR-139–5p as critical regulators for their ectopic expression causing growth inhibition.
2050) Another network-revealing study about cancer biology was conducted by Cheng et al., who transfected miR-34a in a hepatocellular carcinoma cell line.
2051) In the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis analysis coupled with mass spectrometry, half of the differentially regulated proteins were found to be miR-34a targets and shown belong to p53 signaling pathway [43].Although these studies have led to identification of many novel miRNA candidate targets, a clear distinction between direct and indirect targets is lacking.
2053) However, these approaches do not measure the protein expression level of the direct targets.
2059) Brennecke J, Hipfner DR, Stark A, Russell RB, et al. Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila.
2063) Mechanism of translational regulation by miR-2 from sites in the 5′ untranslated region or the open reading frame.
2064) Nelson PT, Wang WX, Mao G, Wilfred BR, et al. Specific sequence determinants of miR-15/107 microRNA gene group targets.
2071) Landthaler M, Gaidatzis D, Rothballer A, Chen PY, et al. Molecular characterization of human Argonaute-containing ribonucleo protein complexes and their bound target mRNAs.
2075) Schepeler T, Holm A, Halvey P, Nordentoft I, et al. Attenuation of the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex in colorectal cancer cells induces several growth-suppressive microRNAs that target cancer promoting genes.
2080) Therefore, the abundance of mRNA/miRNA species does not serve as the best surrogate marker for biological activity of these proteins.
2084) Kaller et al. employed pSILAC and microarray analysis to study the effects of miR-34a, an important mediator of p53-mediated tumor suppressor activities on mRNA and proteome expression [69].
2085) Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
2087) Given the extensive involvement of miRNA in physiology, dysregulation of miRNA expression can be associated with cancer pathobiology including oncogenesis [11], proliferation [12], epithelial-mesenchymal transition [13], metastasis [14], aberrations in metabolism [15], and angiogenesis [16], among others.
2088) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
2089) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
2090) Pinto,2,3 and Akhilesh Pandey1Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at ProteomicsSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:AbstractMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that play important roles in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression.
2091) miRNAs impose this layer of posttranscriptional gene regulation on a wide spectrum of biological processes ranging from gametogenesis [6], development [7], and tissue repair [8] to aging [9].
2092) KettingA Dead End for MicroRNAsCell, Volume 131, Issue 7, 28 December 2007, Pages 1226-1227 PDF (197 K)           Open ArchiveSummaryMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are inhibitors of gene expression capable of controlling processes in normal development and cancer.
2094) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2096) These regulators of gene expression are capable of defining and altering cell fate.
2097) Evidence suggests that miRNAs participate in the regulation of a large variety of cellular processes and that the vast majority of miRNAs show tissue or developmental stage-specific expression (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002, Lim et al., 2005 and Wienholds et al., 2005).
2099) In animals, miRNAs utilize a seed sequence at their 5′ end (nt 2–8) to associate with 3′UTR regions of mRNAs to suppress gene expression by inhibiting translation that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2100) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2101) To investigate the possibility that RBPs influence the activity of the miRNA pathway, we examined the effect of expression of several RBPs on miR-221-mediated repression of p27.
2103) Dnd1 had no effect on expression from either a construct encoding luciferase-p27 3′UTR that is mutated at the two miR-221 sites or on an empty luciferase reporter vector, suggesting that the increase in luciferase expression was not caused by a general effect on transcription or translation efficiency but rather was specific to miRNA-repressed translation.
2105) An immunostaining with anti-HA antibody demonstrates the expression of huDnd1 while H2B-GFP was used to control transfection efficiency.
2107) Blue and brown bars represent control and Dnd1 vectors, respectively.(C) HEK293 cells were cotransfected with the indicated expression constructs and subjected to IP with anti-HA antibodies.
2108) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2109) Collectively, these results suggest that inhibiting miRNA function is specific to Dnd1 and indicate that for counteracting miRNA activity, Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain.Suppression of gene expression by miRNAs is exerted by translational inhibition that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2110) To test the possible effect of Dnd1 on these pathways, we examined the endogenous p27 RNA and protein levels in HEK293 cells (expressing endogenous p27 and miR-221and -222, Figure 2C).
2111) To study endogenous Dnd1 function, we first tested by quantitative RT-PCR several human cancer cell lines for the expression of Dnd1 and found the teratoma Tera1 cell line to be positive.
2112) Interestingly, Tera1 cells express high levels of the miR-372 family, which we have previously shown to target LATS2 through two sites at its 3′UTR (Figure S1B).
2115) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2116) Altogether, these results indicate that endogenous Dnd1 in Tera1 cells protects the expression of endogenous LATS2 from being targeted by the miR-372 family.Preferential Association of Dnd1 with mRNAsSince Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain to counteract miRNA function, it is conceivable that Dnd1 interferes with either the expression, the processing to mature miRNA, or the subcellular localization of miR-221.
2118) Western blot analysis with anti-HA confirmed the expression of human and zebrafish proteins, whereas nuclear Cdc6 and cytoplasmic Tubulin verified cellular fractionation (Figure 2A, bottom).An alternative explanation that could account for Dnd1 activity is that the protein binds miRNAs and inhibits their function.
2121) We followed the expression changes of three germline specific genes: nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa.
2122) The specific expression of nanos1 and TDRD7 in the PGCs is considered to be the result of miR-430-dependent inhibition in somatic cells, while Vasa regulation is miR-430 independent (Mishima et al., 2006).
2125) RNA was extracted from these embryos, and the endogenous levels of the germline-specific genes (nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa) were compared to Odc1, a ubiquitously expressed gene.
2126) Similar to the endogenous expression pattern, the injection of RNA, encoding a fluorescent marker gene fused to the 3′UTR of nanos1, TDRD7, or Vasa, into zebrafish embryos leads to preferential fluorescence in PGCs ( Koprunner et al. [2001] and data not shown).
2127) Upon Dnd1 knockdown, quantitative pixel-intensity analysis shows a clear and significant reduction in red fluorescent signal (DsRed-nos1 3′UTR or DsRed-TDRD7 3′UTR), but not green (coinjected GFP-vasa 3′UTR) in PGCs ( Figures 3B and S2B), indicating that Dnd1 affects gene expression through the 3′UTR of nanos1 and TDRD7.
2128) We therefore compared the expression of marker genes fused to a wild-type or a mutated miR-430-targeting site in nos1 3′UTR and TDRD7 3′UTR.
2132) We immunoprecipitated (IP) HA-tagged Dnd1, Dnd1(Y104C), or control proteins from HEK293 cells and incubated them with RNA purified from MCF-7 cells expressing control vector, wild-type, or mutant 1 luciferase-p27 3′UTR(196–300).
2133) Although we cannot rule out that mutations in URRs have effects on the binding of other RBPs, our results suggest that Dnd1 binds URRs and thereby mediates suppression of miRNAs.To test the in vivo relevance of URRs to Dnd1 function, we mutated URRs found within the zebrafish nos1 and TDRD7 3′UTRs and tested the effect of these mutations on gene expression.
2135) Figure 5B shows that mut3 did not reduce gene expression when miR-430 target site was mutated, suggesting that also in this case Dnd1 effect is miRNA dependent.Full-size image (123 K)Figure 5.
2136) Error bars depict the standard error of the mean (SEM); p value was calculated using Ttest.Figure optionsMechanism of Dnd1 FunctionOur results point to a model by which Dnd1 positively regulates gene expression by prohibiting miRNA-mediated gene suppression.
2137) As HEK293T cells express miR-221, exogenous introduction of miR-221 results in only a slight effect on p27 expression, while introduction of human Dnd1 raises p27 levels (see also Figure 1C).
2140) CR is coding region.Figure optionsDiscussionIn this study we provide evidence that primordial germ cells possess factors such as Dnd1 that protect the expression of several genes from repression by miRNAs, as exemplified by miR-430.
2142) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2146) First, as it affects protein synthesis and mRNA stability rather than controlling the expression of miRNAs in the cells, it is potentially a very rapid mechanism.
2148) Fourth, this mechanism allows differential gene regulation in different tissues while keeping the expression of both miRNAs and mRNAs constant in the cell.
2149) One implication of this mode of regulation is that the presence of a miRNA and its target in the same tissue does not necessarily result in repression, therefore allowing coexpression of both miRNA and target mRNA.
2152) For protein-expression analysis and immunoprecipitation HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using calcium-phosphate precipitation.MCF7- and Tera1 cells were transfected using PEI (Polysciences, Inc.) or Fugene (Roche), respectively, for luciferase analysis with 10 ng of reporter, 5 ng of renilla control plasmid, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec or miR-Vec control, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec control or expression plasmid for Dnd1 or homologs.
2155) RazMultiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafishCurr.
2158) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2161) Last, the repression of CAT-1 mRNA by miR-122 in hepatocarcinoma cells is relieved in stress conditions by binding of HuR, an AU-rich element-binding protein, to a region at the end of the 3′UTR of CAT-1 ( Bhattacharyya et al., 2006).In addition, evidence in zebrafish suggests that, a subset of miR-430 targets is protected from repression in germ cells (Mishima et al., 2006).
2162) Together, these observations indicate that the miRNA pathway can be controlled at different levels, from stability, processing, sequence identity, and binding to target mRNAs.
2165) To further test whether Dnd1 activity depends on miRNA function we inactivated miRNA synthesis with an shRNA vector targeting Pasha, a component specific to the miRNA pathway (Gregory et al., 2004).
2166) The positions of the two target sequences of miR-221 are marked.(B) Expression vectors for miR-221 and human Dnd1 (huDnd1) were cotransfected with the indicated luciferase constructs.
2167) Interestingly, Tera1 cells express high levels of the miR-372 family, which we have previously shown to target LATS2 through two sites at its 3′UTR (Figure S1B).
2168) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2169) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2170) Altogether, these results indicate that endogenous Dnd1 in Tera1 cells protects the expression of endogenous LATS2 from being targeted by the miR-372 family.Preferential Association of Dnd1 with mRNAsSince Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain to counteract miRNA function, it is conceivable that Dnd1 interferes with either the expression, the processing to mature miRNA, or the subcellular localization of miR-221.
2171) To test this option we converted one miR-221-targeting site in p27 3′UTR to an RNAi site (named FC, a full complementary region to miR-221) and mutated the seed of the second site ( Figure 2B).
2173) We therefore compared the expression of marker genes fused to a wild-type or a mutated miR-430-targeting site in nos1 3′UTR and TDRD7 3′UTR.
2174) Quantitative pixel-intensity analysis showed that the reduction in fluorescence resulting from knocking down Dnd1 function was effectively suppressed by mutating the miR-430-targeting site ( Figures 3C and S2C).
2176) To test whether the effect of URR mutation was dependent on miRNA function, we introduced the mutation of the URR in the background of the miR-430 target-site mutant.
2177) Figure 5B shows that mut3 did not reduce gene expression when miR-430 target site was mutated, suggesting that also in this case Dnd1 effect is miRNA dependent.Full-size image (123 K)Figure 5.
2178) To test this model we examined the direct interaction of miR-221 with its target p27 in human HEK293 cells, in the presence or absence of human Dnd1.
2181) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2186) One implication of this mode of regulation is that the presence of a miRNA and its target in the same tissue does not necessarily result in repression, therefore allowing coexpression of both miRNA and target mRNA.
2189) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
2192) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2194) These tumors resemble human testicular germ-cell tumors, which are the most common cancers affecting young men (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005 and Youngren et al., 2005).
2195) Additionally, a recent finding in C. elegans showed that disruption of the germ plasm by loss of two genes involved in RNA biology in these animals can also lead to the development of similar tumors ( Ciosk et al., 2006).
2196) Our results demonstrate that loss of Dnd1 enhances miRNA repression of some genes that are essential for primordial germ-cell development ( Koprunner et al., 2001) (among them nanos1 and TDRD7) and predict that this mechanism can be responsible for defects in germ-cell survival or for tumor formation.
2198) Griekspoor et al.A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumorsCell, 124 (2006), pp.
2200) KettingA Dead End for MicroRNAsCell, Volume 131, Issue 7, 28 December 2007, Pages 1226-1227 PDF (197 K)           Open ArchiveSummaryMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are inhibitors of gene expression capable of controlling processes in normal development and cancer.
2201) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2202) To study endogenous Dnd1 function, we first tested by quantitative RT-PCR several human cancer cell lines for the expression of Dnd1 and found the teratoma Tera1 cell line to be positive.
2203) These tumors resemble human testicular germ-cell tumors, which are the most common cancers affecting young men (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005 and Youngren et al., 2005).
2207) KettingA Dead End for MicroRNAsCell, Volume 131, Issue 7, 28 December 2007, Pages 1226-1227 PDF (197 K)           Open ArchiveSummaryMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are inhibitors of gene expression capable of controlling processes in normal development and cancer.
2208) These regulators of gene expression are capable of defining and altering cell fate.
2209) Recent estimations suggest the existence of 500–1000 miRNAs per genome and that a large proportion of human protein-coding genes are under the regulation of one or more miRNAs (Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 and Lewis et al., 2005).
2210) In animals, miRNAs utilize a seed sequence at their 5′ end (nt 2–8) to associate with 3′UTR regions of mRNAs to suppress gene expression by inhibiting translation that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2211) They are enriched in factors involved in inhibition of translation and lack ribosomes and translation-initiation factors (Liu et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).Importantly, it is becoming increasingly clear that during their biogenesis, the activity of miRNAs is subjected to intense regulation.
2212) As specific regions in the 3′UTR of these genes counteract their repression in germline cells, it is reasonable to assume that germ cell-specific factors bind and counteract miR-430 function in these cells.
2213) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2214) Dnd1 had no effect on expression from either a construct encoding luciferase-p27 3′UTR that is mutated at the two miR-221 sites or on an empty luciferase reporter vector, suggesting that the increase in luciferase expression was not caused by a general effect on transcription or translation efficiency but rather was specific to miRNA-repressed translation.
2215) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2216) Collectively, these results suggest that inhibiting miRNA function is specific to Dnd1 and indicate that for counteracting miRNA activity, Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain.Suppression of gene expression by miRNAs is exerted by translational inhibition that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2217) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2218) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2219) To examine the effects of Dnd1 on miR-221 biogenesis, MCF-7 cells were cotransfected with vectors encoding either human or zebrafish Dnd1 and miR-221 or control miRNA, and subsequently subjected to subcellular fractionation, RNA isolation, and to an RNase protection assay (RPA) to detect cyclophilin control RNA and miR-221 precursor and mature forms.
2220) We followed the expression changes of three germline specific genes: nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa.
2222) RNA was extracted from these embryos, and the endogenous levels of the germline-specific genes (nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa) were compared to Odc1, a ubiquitously expressed gene.
2223) Then, we cloned the 3′UTRs of nanos1, TDRD7, and control Vasa downstream of fluorescence marker genes, to determine whether the Dnd1 effect is mediated through their 3′UTR.
2224) Similar to the endogenous expression pattern, the injection of RNA, encoding a fluorescent marker gene fused to the 3′UTR of nanos1, TDRD7, or Vasa, into zebrafish embryos leads to preferential fluorescence in PGCs ( Koprunner et al. [2001] and data not shown).
2225) Upon Dnd1 knockdown, quantitative pixel-intensity analysis shows a clear and significant reduction in red fluorescent signal (DsRed-nos1 3′UTR or DsRed-TDRD7 3′UTR), but not green (coinjected GFP-vasa 3′UTR) in PGCs ( Figures 3B and S2B), indicating that Dnd1 affects gene expression through the 3′UTR of nanos1 and TDRD7.
2227) We therefore compared the expression of marker genes fused to a wild-type or a mutated miR-430-targeting site in nos1 3′UTR and TDRD7 3′UTR.
2228) To more specifically address the role of the URRs, we generated two mutants: mutant 1, in which the two URRs were replaced by non-URRs, and mutant 2, where adjacent sequences were similarly mutated as control.
2229) Although we cannot rule out that mutations in URRs have effects on the binding of other RBPs, our results suggest that Dnd1 binds URRs and thereby mediates suppression of miRNAs.To test the in vivo relevance of URRs to Dnd1 function, we mutated URRs found within the zebrafish nos1 and TDRD7 3′UTRs and tested the effect of these mutations on gene expression.
2230) Figure 5B shows that mut3 did not reduce gene expression when miR-430 target site was mutated, suggesting that also in this case Dnd1 effect is miRNA dependent.Full-size image (123 K)Figure 5.
2231) Error bars depict the standard error of the mean (SEM); p value was calculated using Ttest.Figure optionsMechanism of Dnd1 FunctionOur results point to a model by which Dnd1 positively regulates gene expression by prohibiting miRNA-mediated gene suppression.
2232) CR is coding region.Figure optionsDiscussionIn this study we provide evidence that primordial germ cells possess factors such as Dnd1 that protect the expression of several genes from repression by miRNAs, as exemplified by miR-430.
2233) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2234) However, recently three protein-coding genes, from which two are RBPs and one miRNA, were identified to be candidate disease genes from the 129 strain (Zhu et al., 2007).
2235) Additionally, a recent finding in C. elegans showed that disruption of the germ plasm by loss of two genes involved in RNA biology in these animals can also lead to the development of similar tumors ( Ciosk et al., 2006).
2236) Our results demonstrate that loss of Dnd1 enhances miRNA repression of some genes that are essential for primordial germ-cell development ( Koprunner et al., 2001) (among them nanos1 and TDRD7) and predict that this mechanism can be responsible for defects in germ-cell survival or for tumor formation.
2237) Whether this is a general mechanism applicable to HuR, or other RBPs, remains to be seen.Counteracting miRNAs and siRNAsOur work shows that Dnd1 activity can counteract gene silencing induced by miRNAs but not by siRNA-mediated RNA interference (RNAi).
2239) Fourth, this mechanism allows differential gene regulation in different tissues while keeping the expression of both miRNAs and mRNAs constant in the cell.
2242) For protein-expression analysis and immunoprecipitation HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using calcium-phosphate precipitation.MCF7- and Tera1 cells were transfected using PEI (Polysciences, Inc.) or Fugene (Roche), respectively, for luciferase analysis with 10 ng of reporter, 5 ng of renilla control plasmid, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec or miR-Vec control, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec control or expression plasmid for Dnd1 or homologs.
2248) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
2249) Griekspoor et al.A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumorsCell, 124 (2006), pp.
2250) RazMultiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafishCurr.
2254) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2257) Dnd1 had no effect on expression from either a construct encoding luciferase-p27 3′UTR that is mutated at the two miR-221 sites or on an empty luciferase reporter vector, suggesting that the increase in luciferase expression was not caused by a general effect on transcription or translation efficiency but rather was specific to miRNA-repressed translation.
2258) Interestingly, Tera1 cells express high levels of the miR-372 family, which we have previously shown to target LATS2 through two sites at its 3′UTR (Figure S1B).
2259) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2260) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2261) To test this option we converted one miR-221-targeting site in p27 3′UTR to an RNAi site (named FC, a full complementary region to miR-221) and mutated the seed of the second site ( Figure 2B).
2264) We therefore compared the expression of marker genes fused to a wild-type or a mutated miR-430-targeting site in nos1 3′UTR and TDRD7 3′UTR.
2265) Quantitative pixel-intensity analysis showed that the reduction in fluorescence resulting from knocking down Dnd1 function was effectively suppressed by mutating the miR-430-targeting site ( Figures 3C and S2C).
2266) RNA was extracted and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis to compare endogenous levels of nanos1 and vasa to odc, and nanos to vasa.(B) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with DsRed-nos1-3′UTR and gfp-vasa-3′UTR together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.(C) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with RNA containing the venus open-reading frame fused to the wild-type nanos1 3′UTR (3′nos1wt), RNA containing the cfp open-reading frame fused to the miR-430-binding site mutated nanos1 3′UTR (cfp-3′nos1mut1) and vasa-dsRed (for labeling the germinal granule for easier identification of germ cells) together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.
2267) Our data suggest that these domains bind mRNAs at specific sites.
2269) To test whether the region in between the two miRNA sites is sufficient to confer Dnd1 activity, we cloned it into a luciferase reporter vector (p27 3′UTR(196–300)).
2272) Beads were incubated with the RNA for 45 min at 6°C, washed, and subjected to RPA using probes to detect luciferase and cyclophilin mRNAs, and the noncoding human telomerase RNA (hTR).Figure optionsNext, we examined whether the URRs serve as docking sites for Dnd1.
2274) To test whether the effect of URR mutation was dependent on miRNA function, we introduced the mutation of the URR in the background of the miR-430 target-site mutant.
2275) Figure 5B shows that mut3 did not reduce gene expression when miR-430 target site was mutated, suggesting that also in this case Dnd1 effect is miRNA dependent.Full-size image (123 K)Figure 5.
2279) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430-binding site pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTR was amplified using primers (GTCTTTTTGTGTGTGTGTAT and CAAAATCAAACAGTGAACGC) resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTRmut1 (3′nos1mut1 in Figure 3C).
2282) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430- binding site pSP64T-mgfp-TDRD7-3′UTR was amplified with primer (TCTTTGGTTTGTTTTGCTGTGTTT/CCAAAATCAAAAAGTACAAACAATG) and subloned into an ecfp-containing vector resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-TDRD7-3′UTRmut1 (3′TDRD7mut1 in Figure S2).
2283) These regulators of gene expression are capable of defining and altering cell fate.
2284) Recent estimations suggest the existence of 500–1000 miRNAs per genome and that a large proportion of human protein-coding genes are under the regulation of one or more miRNAs (Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 and Lewis et al., 2005).
2285) Evidence suggests that miRNAs participate in the regulation of a large variety of cellular processes and that the vast majority of miRNAs show tissue or developmental stage-specific expression (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002, Lim et al., 2005 and Wienholds et al., 2005).
2286) They are enriched in factors involved in inhibition of translation and lack ribosomes and translation-initiation factors (Liu et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).Importantly, it is becoming increasingly clear that during their biogenesis, the activity of miRNAs is subjected to intense regulation.
2287) The specific expression of nanos1 and TDRD7 in the PGCs is considered to be the result of miR-430-dependent inhibition in somatic cells, while Vasa regulation is miR-430 independent (Mishima et al., 2006).
2288) Error bars depict the standard error of the mean (SEM); p value was calculated using Ttest.Figure optionsMechanism of Dnd1 FunctionOur results point to a model by which Dnd1 positively regulates gene expression by prohibiting miRNA-mediated gene suppression.
2290) (2) Dnd1 could localize mRNAs to locations in the cell that are not accessible to miRNA-mediated silencing but still mRNA degradation by an RNAi-mediated mechanism is possible.3′UTRs as Binding Platforms for Regulating miRNAs and RBPsOur results strongly suggest that the 3′UTRs of at least some mRNAs are binding platforms for both miRNAs that repress translation and RBPs that regulate this repression.
2293) Fourth, this mechanism allows differential gene regulation in different tissues while keeping the expression of both miRNAs and mRNAs constant in the cell.
2294) One implication of this mode of regulation is that the presence of a miRNA and its target in the same tissue does not necessarily result in repression, therefore allowing coexpression of both miRNA and target mRNA.
2305) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2306) Recent estimations suggest the existence of 500–1000 miRNAs per genome and that a large proportion of human protein-coding genes are under the regulation of one or more miRNAs (Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 and Lewis et al., 2005).
2310) Last, the repression of CAT-1 mRNA by miR-122 in hepatocarcinoma cells is relieved in stress conditions by binding of HuR, an AU-rich element-binding protein, to a region at the end of the 3′UTR of CAT-1 ( Bhattacharyya et al., 2006).In addition, evidence in zebrafish suggests that, a subset of miR-430 targets is protected from repression in germ cells (Mishima et al., 2006).
2311) Germ cells are known to contain structures referred to as germ plasm that resemble P bodies; these contain an array of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) giving these cells unique control over translation and the stability of mRNA and proteins (Kotaja et al., 2006 and Kotaja and Sassone-Corsi, 2007).
2313) We found that human dead end 1 (Dnd1), a protein whose function is required for germ cell survival and migration in zebrafish (Weidinger et al., 2003), affects miRNA activity.
2315) p27 protein level was analyzed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest, Sheffield, UK).(D and E) Similar to (B), only that several RBPs, as well as the zebrafish Dnd1 homolog (drDnd1) and a mutant in the RNA-binding domain (drDnd1Y104C), were cotransfected together with pGL3-p27-3′UTR and renilla luciferase control.(F) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and subjected to RPA with probes to detect p27 mRNA and control cyclophilin and to immunoblot analysis using p27 and control Tubulin antibodies.
2316) Quantification of protein levels was performed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest; Sheffield, UK).(G) Tera1 cells were transfected with shDnd1 and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis for LATS2, Dnd1, and GAPDH control.
2318) To test the possible effect of Dnd1 on these pathways, we examined the endogenous p27 RNA and protein levels in HEK293 cells (expressing endogenous p27 and miR-221and -222, Figure 2C).
2319) Figure 1F shows that transfection of either human or wild-type zebrafish Dnd1, but not the Y104C mutant, caused elevation in p27 mRNA (up to 1.5-fold) and protein (up to 5-fold), indicating that Dnd1 can potently block endogenous miR-221 and -222-mediated mRNA decay and translation inhibition.In all our experiments so far we examined the function of human Dnd1 by ectopic introduction.
2320) Western blot analysis with anti-HA confirmed the expression of human and zebrafish proteins, whereas nuclear Cdc6 and cytoplasmic Tubulin verified cellular fractionation (Figure 2A, bottom).An alternative explanation that could account for Dnd1 activity is that the protein binds miRNAs and inhibits their function.
2321) Superimposing the two homology-modeled domains in the structure of the similar Drosophila sex-lethal protein bound to uridine-rich single-stranded RNA indicated clearly that Dnd1 has all the hallmarks necessary to bind U-rich single-stranded RNA ( Handa et al., 1999).
2322) We immunoprecipitated (IP) HA-tagged Dnd1, Dnd1(Y104C), or control proteins from HEK293 cells and incubated them with RNA purified from MCF-7 cells expressing control vector, wild-type, or mutant 1 luciferase-p27 3′UTR(196–300).
2323) However, recently three protein-coding genes, from which two are RBPs and one miRNA, were identified to be candidate disease genes from the 129 strain (Zhu et al., 2007).
2325) First, as it affects protein synthesis and mRNA stability rather than controlling the expression of miRNAs in the cells, it is potentially a very rapid mechanism.
2326) For protein-expression analysis and immunoprecipitation HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using calcium-phosphate precipitation.MCF7- and Tera1 cells were transfected using PEI (Polysciences, Inc.) or Fugene (Roche), respectively, for luciferase analysis with 10 ng of reporter, 5 ng of renilla control plasmid, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec or miR-Vec control, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec control or expression plasmid for Dnd1 or homologs.
2331) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2332) Last, the repression of CAT-1 mRNA by miR-122 in hepatocarcinoma cells is relieved in stress conditions by binding of HuR, an AU-rich element-binding protein, to a region at the end of the 3′UTR of CAT-1 ( Bhattacharyya et al., 2006).In addition, evidence in zebrafish suggests that, a subset of miR-430 targets is protected from repression in germ cells (Mishima et al., 2006).
2333) As specific regions in the 3′UTR of these genes counteract their repression in germline cells, it is reasonable to assume that germ cell-specific factors bind and counteract miR-430 function in these cells.
2334) Germ cells are known to contain structures referred to as germ plasm that resemble P bodies; these contain an array of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) giving these cells unique control over translation and the stability of mRNA and proteins (Kotaja et al., 2006 and Kotaja and Sassone-Corsi, 2007).
2335) Together, these observations indicate that the miRNA pathway can be controlled at different levels, from stability, processing, sequence identity, and binding to target mRNAs.
2336) p27 protein level was analyzed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest, Sheffield, UK).(D and E) Similar to (B), only that several RBPs, as well as the zebrafish Dnd1 homolog (drDnd1) and a mutant in the RNA-binding domain (drDnd1Y104C), were cotransfected together with pGL3-p27-3′UTR and renilla luciferase control.(F) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and subjected to RPA with probes to detect p27 mRNA and control cyclophilin and to immunoblot analysis using p27 and control Tubulin antibodies.
2337) Below, a blow up of p27 signal in control and wild-type IP samples is shown for clarity.(D) The same amount of extracts from input and IP (marked T and IP, respectively) was used for immunoblot analysis with anti-HA and control anti-Tubulin antibodies.Figure optionsDnd1 contains a conserved RNA-binding domain that bears high similarity to that of apobec complementation factor (ACF), LOC166863, Syncrip, hnRNPR, ELAV4, and DAZ.
2338) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2341) Collectively, these results suggest that inhibiting miRNA function is specific to Dnd1 and indicate that for counteracting miRNA activity, Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain.Suppression of gene expression by miRNAs is exerted by translational inhibition that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2342) Altogether, these results indicate that endogenous Dnd1 in Tera1 cells protects the expression of endogenous LATS2 from being targeted by the miR-372 family.Preferential Association of Dnd1 with mRNAsSince Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain to counteract miRNA function, it is conceivable that Dnd1 interferes with either the expression, the processing to mature miRNA, or the subcellular localization of miR-221.
2343) Western blot analysis with anti-HA confirmed the expression of human and zebrafish proteins, whereas nuclear Cdc6 and cytoplasmic Tubulin verified cellular fractionation (Figure 2A, bottom).An alternative explanation that could account for Dnd1 activity is that the protein binds miRNAs and inhibits their function.
2347) RNA was extracted and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis to compare endogenous levels of nanos1 and vasa to odc, and nanos to vasa.(B) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with DsRed-nos1-3′UTR and gfp-vasa-3′UTR together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.(C) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with RNA containing the venus open-reading frame fused to the wild-type nanos1 3′UTR (3′nos1wt), RNA containing the cfp open-reading frame fused to the miR-430-binding site mutated nanos1 3′UTR (cfp-3′nos1mut1) and vasa-dsRed (for labeling the germinal granule for easier identification of germ cells) together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.
2348) Our data suggest that these domains bind mRNAs at specific sites.
2349) Superimposing the two homology-modeled domains in the structure of the similar Drosophila sex-lethal protein bound to uridine-rich single-stranded RNA indicated clearly that Dnd1 has all the hallmarks necessary to bind U-rich single-stranded RNA ( Handa et al., 1999).
2353) Although we cannot rule out that mutations in URRs have effects on the binding of other RBPs, our results suggest that Dnd1 binds URRs and thereby mediates suppression of miRNAs.To test the in vivo relevance of URRs to Dnd1 function, we mutated URRs found within the zebrafish nos1 and TDRD7 3′UTRs and tested the effect of these mutations on gene expression.
2362) (2) Dnd1 could localize mRNAs to locations in the cell that are not accessible to miRNA-mediated silencing but still mRNA degradation by an RNAi-mediated mechanism is possible.3′UTRs as Binding Platforms for Regulating miRNAs and RBPsOur results strongly suggest that the 3′UTRs of at least some mRNAs are binding platforms for both miRNAs that repress translation and RBPs that regulate this repression.
2363) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430-binding site pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTR was amplified using primers (GTCTTTTTGTGTGTGTGTAT and CAAAATCAAACAGTGAACGC) resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTRmut1 (3′nos1mut1 in Figure 3C).
2366) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430- binding site pSP64T-mgfp-TDRD7-3′UTR was amplified with primer (TCTTTGGTTTGTTTTGCTGTGTTT/CCAAAATCAAAAAGTACAAACAATG) and subloned into an ecfp-containing vector resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-TDRD7-3′UTRmut1 (3′TDRD7mut1 in Figure S2).
2367) Here we demonstrate that the expression of dead end 1 (Dnd1), an evolutionary conserved RNA-binding protein (RBP), counteracts the function of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial germ cells of zebrafish by binding mRNAs and prohibiting miRNAs from associating with their target sites.
2368) Recent estimations suggest the existence of 500–1000 miRNAs per genome and that a large proportion of human protein-coding genes are under the regulation of one or more miRNAs (Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 and Lewis et al., 2005).
2369) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2370) We found that human dead end 1 (Dnd1), a protein whose function is required for germ cell survival and migration in zebrafish (Weidinger et al., 2003), affects miRNA activity.
2372) The positions of the two target sequences of miR-221 are marked.(B) Expression vectors for miR-221 and human Dnd1 (huDnd1) were cotransfected with the indicated luciferase constructs.
2374) RNA was extracted from 80% of each IP and 5% from each input and subjected to RPA analysis to detect p27 and control cyclophilin mRNAs, human telomerase RNA (hTR), and miR-221.
2375) Figure 1F shows that transfection of either human or wild-type zebrafish Dnd1, but not the Y104C mutant, caused elevation in p27 mRNA (up to 1.5-fold) and protein (up to 5-fold), indicating that Dnd1 can potently block endogenous miR-221 and -222-mediated mRNA decay and translation inhibition.In all our experiments so far we examined the function of human Dnd1 by ectopic introduction.
2376) To study endogenous Dnd1 function, we first tested by quantitative RT-PCR several human cancer cell lines for the expression of Dnd1 and found the teratoma Tera1 cell line to be positive.
2377) To examine the effects of Dnd1 on miR-221 biogenesis, MCF-7 cells were cotransfected with vectors encoding either human or zebrafish Dnd1 and miR-221 or control miRNA, and subsequently subjected to subcellular fractionation, RNA isolation, and to an RNase protection assay (RPA) to detect cyclophilin control RNA and miR-221 precursor and mature forms.
2378) Western blot analysis with anti-HA confirmed the expression of human and zebrafish proteins, whereas nuclear Cdc6 and cytoplasmic Tubulin verified cellular fractionation (Figure 2A, bottom).An alternative explanation that could account for Dnd1 activity is that the protein binds miRNAs and inhibits their function.
2380) Beads were incubated with the RNA for 45 min at 6°C, washed, and subjected to RPA using probes to detect luciferase and cyclophilin mRNAs, and the noncoding human telomerase RNA (hTR).Figure optionsNext, we examined whether the URRs serve as docking sites for Dnd1.
2381) To test this model we examined the direct interaction of miR-221 with its target p27 in human HEK293 cells, in the presence or absence of human Dnd1.
2382) As HEK293T cells express miR-221, exogenous introduction of miR-221 results in only a slight effect on p27 expression, while introduction of human Dnd1 raises p27 levels (see also Figure 1C).
2384) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2385) These tumors resemble human testicular germ-cell tumors, which are the most common cancers affecting young men (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005 and Youngren et al., 2005).
2390) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
2393) KettingA Dead End for MicroRNAsCell, Volume 131, Issue 7, 28 December 2007, Pages 1226-1227 PDF (197 K)           Open ArchiveSummaryMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are inhibitors of gene expression capable of controlling processes in normal development and cancer.
2395) Germ cells are known to contain structures referred to as germ plasm that resemble P bodies; these contain an array of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) giving these cells unique control over translation and the stability of mRNA and proteins (Kotaja et al., 2006 and Kotaja and Sassone-Corsi, 2007).
2396) Together, these observations indicate that the miRNA pathway can be controlled at different levels, from stability, processing, sequence identity, and binding to target mRNAs.
2398) An immunostaining with anti-HA antibody demonstrates the expression of huDnd1 while H2B-GFP was used to control transfection efficiency.
2399) p27 protein level was analyzed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest, Sheffield, UK).(D and E) Similar to (B), only that several RBPs, as well as the zebrafish Dnd1 homolog (drDnd1) and a mutant in the RNA-binding domain (drDnd1Y104C), were cotransfected together with pGL3-p27-3′UTR and renilla luciferase control.(F) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and subjected to RPA with probes to detect p27 mRNA and control cyclophilin and to immunoblot analysis using p27 and control Tubulin antibodies.
2400) Quantification of protein levels was performed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest; Sheffield, UK).(G) Tera1 cells were transfected with shDnd1 and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis for LATS2, Dnd1, and GAPDH control.
2401) Blue and brown bars represent control and Dnd1 vectors, respectively.(C) HEK293 cells were cotransfected with the indicated expression constructs and subjected to IP with anti-HA antibodies.
2402) RNA was extracted from 80% of each IP and 5% from each input and subjected to RPA analysis to detect p27 and control cyclophilin mRNAs, human telomerase RNA (hTR), and miR-221.
2403) Below, a blow up of p27 signal in control and wild-type IP samples is shown for clarity.(D) The same amount of extracts from input and IP (marked T and IP, respectively) was used for immunoblot analysis with anti-HA and control anti-Tubulin antibodies.Figure optionsDnd1 contains a conserved RNA-binding domain that bears high similarity to that of apobec complementation factor (ACF), LOC166863, Syncrip, hnRNPR, ELAV4, and DAZ.
2404) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2405) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2406) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2407) To examine the effects of Dnd1 on miR-221 biogenesis, MCF-7 cells were cotransfected with vectors encoding either human or zebrafish Dnd1 and miR-221 or control miRNA, and subsequently subjected to subcellular fractionation, RNA isolation, and to an RNase protection assay (RPA) to detect cyclophilin control RNA and miR-221 precursor and mature forms.
2409) Then, we cloned the 3′UTRs of nanos1, TDRD7, and control Vasa downstream of fluorescence marker genes, to determine whether the Dnd1 effect is mediated through their 3′UTR.
2411) RNA was extracted and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis to compare endogenous levels of nanos1 and vasa to odc, and nanos to vasa.(B) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with DsRed-nos1-3′UTR and gfp-vasa-3′UTR together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.(C) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with RNA containing the venus open-reading frame fused to the wild-type nanos1 3′UTR (3′nos1wt), RNA containing the cfp open-reading frame fused to the miR-430-binding site mutated nanos1 3′UTR (cfp-3′nos1mut1) and vasa-dsRed (for labeling the germinal granule for easier identification of germ cells) together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.
2412) To more specifically address the role of the URRs, we generated two mutants: mutant 1, in which the two URRs were replaced by non-URRs, and mutant 2, where adjacent sequences were similarly mutated as control.
2413) We immunoprecipitated (IP) HA-tagged Dnd1, Dnd1(Y104C), or control proteins from HEK293 cells and incubated them with RNA purified from MCF-7 cells expressing control vector, wild-type, or mutant 1 luciferase-p27 3′UTR(196–300).
2416) First, as it affects protein synthesis and mRNA stability rather than controlling the expression of miRNAs in the cells, it is potentially a very rapid mechanism.
2417) For protein-expression analysis and immunoprecipitation HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using calcium-phosphate precipitation.MCF7- and Tera1 cells were transfected using PEI (Polysciences, Inc.) or Fugene (Roche), respectively, for luciferase analysis with 10 ng of reporter, 5 ng of renilla control plasmid, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec or miR-Vec control, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec control or expression plasmid for Dnd1 or homologs.
2421) RazMultiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafishCurr.
2422) As specific regions in the 3′UTR of these genes counteract their repression in germline cells, it is reasonable to assume that germ cell-specific factors bind and counteract miR-430 function in these cells.
2423) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2424) To study endogenous Dnd1 function, we first tested by quantitative RT-PCR several human cancer cell lines for the expression of Dnd1 and found the teratoma Tera1 cell line to be positive.
2425) These results are in line with the assumption that Dnd1 counteracts miR-221 activity either at the level of RISC-incorporated-mature miR-221 or downstream, rather than by steric hindrance of miR-221.Next, we checked whether Dnd1 interacts with mature miR-221 or with p27 3′UTR.
2427) We followed the expression changes of three germline specific genes: nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa.
2428) RNA was extracted from these embryos, and the endogenous levels of the germline-specific genes (nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa) were compared to Odc1, a ubiquitously expressed gene.
2430) Similarly, the expression of LATS2, a target gene for the miR-372-family, is dependent on the expression of Dnd1 in Tera1, a human cell line derived from a germ-cell tumor that contains high levels of the miR-372 family.
2431) Nevertheless, our results show that counteracting or balancing miRNA function is important during development, at least to maintain viable and functional germ lines in zebrafish and mouse.Dnd1 and Other RBPsRecent publications have implicated mechanisms that counteract the activity of miRNAs on specific mRNAs (Ashraf et al., 2006, Bhattacharyya et al., 2006 and Schratt et al., 2006).
2434) RazMultiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafishCurr.
2436) KettingA Dead End for MicroRNAsCell, Volume 131, Issue 7, 28 December 2007, Pages 1226-1227 PDF (197 K)           Open ArchiveSummaryMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are inhibitors of gene expression capable of controlling processes in normal development and cancer.
2439) Recent estimations suggest the existence of 500–1000 miRNAs per genome and that a large proportion of human protein-coding genes are under the regulation of one or more miRNAs (Aravin and Tuschl, 2005 and Lewis et al., 2005).
2440) Evidence suggests that miRNAs participate in the regulation of a large variety of cellular processes and that the vast majority of miRNAs show tissue or developmental stage-specific expression (Lagos-Quintana et al., 2002, Lim et al., 2005 and Wienholds et al., 2005).
2441) In animals, miRNAs utilize a seed sequence at their 5′ end (nt 2–8) to associate with 3′UTR regions of mRNAs to suppress gene expression by inhibiting translation that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2443) They are enriched in factors involved in inhibition of translation and lack ribosomes and translation-initiation factors (Liu et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).Importantly, it is becoming increasingly clear that during their biogenesis, the activity of miRNAs is subjected to intense regulation.
2449) Last, the repression of CAT-1 mRNA by miR-122 in hepatocarcinoma cells is relieved in stress conditions by binding of HuR, an AU-rich element-binding protein, to a region at the end of the 3′UTR of CAT-1 ( Bhattacharyya et al., 2006).In addition, evidence in zebrafish suggests that, a subset of miR-430 targets is protected from repression in germ cells (Mishima et al., 2006).
2451) As specific regions in the 3′UTR of these genes counteract their repression in germline cells, it is reasonable to assume that germ cell-specific factors bind and counteract miR-430 function in these cells.
2452) Here we show that the RBP dead end 1 (Dnd1) prohibits miRNA-dependent inhibition of gene expression in human cells and in zebrafish primordial germ cells.ResultsDnd1 Relieves miRNA Repression in Human Germline CellsUsing functional genetic-screening approaches, we have recently identified the miRNA-mRNA interactions between p27 and miR-221 and between LATS2 and miR-372 as promoting cancer (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2454) To investigate the possibility that RBPs influence the activity of the miRNA pathway, we examined the effect of expression of several RBPs on miR-221-mediated repression of p27.
2455) We found that human dead end 1 (Dnd1), a protein whose function is required for germ cell survival and migration in zebrafish (Weidinger et al., 2003), affects miRNA activity.
2457) Dnd1 had no effect on expression from either a construct encoding luciferase-p27 3′UTR that is mutated at the two miR-221 sites or on an empty luciferase reporter vector, suggesting that the increase in luciferase expression was not caused by a general effect on transcription or translation efficiency but rather was specific to miRNA-repressed translation.
2458) To further test whether Dnd1 activity depends on miRNA function we inactivated miRNA synthesis with an shRNA vector targeting Pasha, a component specific to the miRNA pathway (Gregory et al., 2004).
2460) The positions of the two target sequences of miR-221 are marked.(B) Expression vectors for miR-221 and human Dnd1 (huDnd1) were cotransfected with the indicated luciferase constructs.
2461) An immunostaining with anti-HA antibody demonstrates the expression of huDnd1 while H2B-GFP was used to control transfection efficiency.
2463) p27 protein level was analyzed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest, Sheffield, UK).(D and E) Similar to (B), only that several RBPs, as well as the zebrafish Dnd1 homolog (drDnd1) and a mutant in the RNA-binding domain (drDnd1Y104C), were cotransfected together with pGL3-p27-3′UTR and renilla luciferase control.(F) HEK293T cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and subjected to RPA with probes to detect p27 mRNA and control cyclophilin and to immunoblot analysis using p27 and control Tubulin antibodies.
2464) Quantification of protein levels was performed using Tina 2.0 software (Raytest; Sheffield, UK).(G) Tera1 cells were transfected with shDnd1 and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis for LATS2, Dnd1, and GAPDH control.
2470) Blue and brown bars represent control and Dnd1 vectors, respectively.(C) HEK293 cells were cotransfected with the indicated expression constructs and subjected to IP with anti-HA antibodies.
2471) RNA was extracted from 80% of each IP and 5% from each input and subjected to RPA analysis to detect p27 and control cyclophilin mRNAs, human telomerase RNA (hTR), and miR-221.
2472) Below, a blow up of p27 signal in control and wild-type IP samples is shown for clarity.(D) The same amount of extracts from input and IP (marked T and IP, respectively) was used for immunoblot analysis with anti-HA and control anti-Tubulin antibodies.Figure optionsDnd1 contains a conserved RNA-binding domain that bears high similarity to that of apobec complementation factor (ACF), LOC166863, Syncrip, hnRNPR, ELAV4, and DAZ.
2473) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2475) Collectively, these results suggest that inhibiting miRNA function is specific to Dnd1 and indicate that for counteracting miRNA activity, Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain.Suppression of gene expression by miRNAs is exerted by translational inhibition that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2476) To test the possible effect of Dnd1 on these pathways, we examined the endogenous p27 RNA and protein levels in HEK293 cells (expressing endogenous p27 and miR-221and -222, Figure 2C).
2477) Figure 1F shows that transfection of either human or wild-type zebrafish Dnd1, but not the Y104C mutant, caused elevation in p27 mRNA (up to 1.5-fold) and protein (up to 5-fold), indicating that Dnd1 can potently block endogenous miR-221 and -222-mediated mRNA decay and translation inhibition.In all our experiments so far we examined the function of human Dnd1 by ectopic introduction.
2480) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2481) Figure 1H shows that transfection of shDnd1, but not a control vector, reduced the expression of a cotransfected luciferase LATS2 3′UTR reporter gene only when the miR-372 targeting sites were present.
2482) Altogether, these results indicate that endogenous Dnd1 in Tera1 cells protects the expression of endogenous LATS2 from being targeted by the miR-372 family.Preferential Association of Dnd1 with mRNAsSince Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain to counteract miRNA function, it is conceivable that Dnd1 interferes with either the expression, the processing to mature miRNA, or the subcellular localization of miR-221.
2483) To examine the effects of Dnd1 on miR-221 biogenesis, MCF-7 cells were cotransfected with vectors encoding either human or zebrafish Dnd1 and miR-221 or control miRNA, and subsequently subjected to subcellular fractionation, RNA isolation, and to an RNase protection assay (RPA) to detect cyclophilin control RNA and miR-221 precursor and mature forms.
2484) To test this option we converted one miR-221-targeting site in p27 3′UTR to an RNAi site (named FC, a full complementary region to miR-221) and mutated the seed of the second site ( Figure 2B).
2487) These results are in line with the assumption that Dnd1 counteracts miR-221 activity either at the level of RISC-incorporated-mature miR-221 or downstream, rather than by steric hindrance of miR-221.Next, we checked whether Dnd1 interacts with mature miR-221 or with p27 3′UTR.
2494) We followed the expression changes of three germline specific genes: nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa.
2495) The specific expression of nanos1 and TDRD7 in the PGCs is considered to be the result of miR-430-dependent inhibition in somatic cells, while Vasa regulation is miR-430 independent (Mishima et al., 2006).
2496) RNA was extracted from these embryos, and the endogenous levels of the germline-specific genes (nanos1, TDRD7, and Vasa) were compared to Odc1, a ubiquitously expressed gene.
2497) Then, we cloned the 3′UTRs of nanos1, TDRD7, and control Vasa downstream of fluorescence marker genes, to determine whether the Dnd1 effect is mediated through their 3′UTR.
2498) Similar to the endogenous expression pattern, the injection of RNA, encoding a fluorescent marker gene fused to the 3′UTR of nanos1, TDRD7, or Vasa, into zebrafish embryos leads to preferential fluorescence in PGCs ( Koprunner et al. [2001] and data not shown).
2499) Upon Dnd1 knockdown, quantitative pixel-intensity analysis shows a clear and significant reduction in red fluorescent signal (DsRed-nos1 3′UTR or DsRed-TDRD7 3′UTR), but not green (coinjected GFP-vasa 3′UTR) in PGCs ( Figures 3B and S2B), indicating that Dnd1 affects gene expression through the 3′UTR of nanos1 and TDRD7.
2500) Quantitative pixel-intensity analysis showed that the reduction in fluorescence resulting from knocking down Dnd1 function was effectively suppressed by mutating the miR-430-targeting site ( Figures 3C and S2C).
2502) RNA was extracted and subjected to quantitative RT-PCR analysis to compare endogenous levels of nanos1 and vasa to odc, and nanos to vasa.(B) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with DsRed-nos1-3′UTR and gfp-vasa-3′UTR together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.(C) One-cell-stage zebrafish embryos were coinjected with RNA containing the venus open-reading frame fused to the wild-type nanos1 3′UTR (3′nos1wt), RNA containing the cfp open-reading frame fused to the miR-430-binding site mutated nanos1 3′UTR (cfp-3′nos1mut1) and vasa-dsRed (for labeling the germinal granule for easier identification of germ cells) together with dead end morpholino or control morpholino.
2504) Our data suggest that these domains bind mRNAs at specific sites.
2505) Superimposing the two homology-modeled domains in the structure of the similar Drosophila sex-lethal protein bound to uridine-rich single-stranded RNA indicated clearly that Dnd1 has all the hallmarks necessary to bind U-rich single-stranded RNA ( Handa et al., 1999).
2506) To test whether the region in between the two miRNA sites is sufficient to confer Dnd1 activity, we cloned it into a luciferase reporter vector (p27 3′UTR(196–300)).
2507) To more specifically address the role of the URRs, we generated two mutants: mutant 1, in which the two URRs were replaced by non-URRs, and mutant 2, where adjacent sequences were similarly mutated as control.
2513) Beads were incubated with the RNA for 45 min at 6°C, washed, and subjected to RPA using probes to detect luciferase and cyclophilin mRNAs, and the noncoding human telomerase RNA (hTR).Figure optionsNext, we examined whether the URRs serve as docking sites for Dnd1.
2514) We immunoprecipitated (IP) HA-tagged Dnd1, Dnd1(Y104C), or control proteins from HEK293 cells and incubated them with RNA purified from MCF-7 cells expressing control vector, wild-type, or mutant 1 luciferase-p27 3′UTR(196–300).
2517) Although we cannot rule out that mutations in URRs have effects on the binding of other RBPs, our results suggest that Dnd1 binds URRs and thereby mediates suppression of miRNAs.To test the in vivo relevance of URRs to Dnd1 function, we mutated URRs found within the zebrafish nos1 and TDRD7 3′UTRs and tested the effect of these mutations on gene expression.
2518) To test whether the effect of URR mutation was dependent on miRNA function, we introduced the mutation of the URR in the background of the miR-430 target-site mutant.
2519) Figure 5B shows that mut3 did not reduce gene expression when miR-430 target site was mutated, suggesting that also in this case Dnd1 effect is miRNA dependent.Full-size image (123 K)Figure 5.
2521) Error bars depict the standard error of the mean (SEM); p value was calculated using Ttest.Figure optionsMechanism of Dnd1 FunctionOur results point to a model by which Dnd1 positively regulates gene expression by prohibiting miRNA-mediated gene suppression.
2522) To test this model we examined the direct interaction of miR-221 with its target p27 in human HEK293 cells, in the presence or absence of human Dnd1.
2524) As HEK293T cells express miR-221, exogenous introduction of miR-221 results in only a slight effect on p27 expression, while introduction of human Dnd1 raises p27 levels (see also Figure 1C).
2532) CR is coding region.Figure optionsDiscussionIn this study we provide evidence that primordial germ cells possess factors such as Dnd1 that protect the expression of several genes from repression by miRNAs, as exemplified by miR-430.
2534) These tumors resemble human testicular germ-cell tumors, which are the most common cancers affecting young men (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005 and Youngren et al., 2005).
2535) However, recently three protein-coding genes, from which two are RBPs and one miRNA, were identified to be candidate disease genes from the 129 strain (Zhu et al., 2007).
2536) Additionally, a recent finding in C. elegans showed that disruption of the germ plasm by loss of two genes involved in RNA biology in these animals can also lead to the development of similar tumors ( Ciosk et al., 2006).
2537) Our results demonstrate that loss of Dnd1 enhances miRNA repression of some genes that are essential for primordial germ-cell development ( Koprunner et al., 2001) (among them nanos1 and TDRD7) and predict that this mechanism can be responsible for defects in germ-cell survival or for tumor formation.
2539) Nevertheless, our results show that counteracting or balancing miRNA function is important during development, at least to maintain viable and functional germ lines in zebrafish and mouse.Dnd1 and Other RBPsRecent publications have implicated mechanisms that counteract the activity of miRNAs on specific mRNAs (Ashraf et al., 2006, Bhattacharyya et al., 2006 and Schratt et al., 2006).
2542) Whether this is a general mechanism applicable to HuR, or other RBPs, remains to be seen.Counteracting miRNAs and siRNAsOur work shows that Dnd1 activity can counteract gene silencing induced by miRNAs but not by siRNA-mediated RNA interference (RNAi).
2545) (2) Dnd1 could localize mRNAs to locations in the cell that are not accessible to miRNA-mediated silencing but still mRNA degradation by an RNAi-mediated mechanism is possible.3′UTRs as Binding Platforms for Regulating miRNAs and RBPsOur results strongly suggest that the 3′UTRs of at least some mRNAs are binding platforms for both miRNAs that repress translation and RBPs that regulate this repression.
2546) First, as it affects protein synthesis and mRNA stability rather than controlling the expression of miRNAs in the cells, it is potentially a very rapid mechanism.
2548) Fourth, this mechanism allows differential gene regulation in different tissues while keeping the expression of both miRNAs and mRNAs constant in the cell.
2549) One implication of this mode of regulation is that the presence of a miRNA and its target in the same tissue does not necessarily result in repression, therefore allowing coexpression of both miRNA and target mRNA.
2556) For protein-expression analysis and immunoprecipitation HEK293 cells were transiently transfected using calcium-phosphate precipitation.MCF7- and Tera1 cells were transfected using PEI (Polysciences, Inc.) or Fugene (Roche), respectively, for luciferase analysis with 10 ng of reporter, 5 ng of renilla control plasmid, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec or miR-Vec control, and 250 ng of either miR-Vec control or expression plasmid for Dnd1 or homologs.
2564) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430-binding site pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTR was amplified using primers (GTCTTTTTGTGTGTGTGTAT and CAAAATCAAACAGTGAACGC) resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-nos1-3′UTRmut1 (3′nos1mut1 in Figure 3C).
2566) To obtain a mutation in the miR-430- binding site pSP64T-mgfp-TDRD7-3′UTR was amplified with primer (TCTTTGGTTTGTTTTGCTGTGTTT/CCAAAATCAAAAAGTACAAACAATG) and subloned into an ecfp-containing vector resulting in pSP64T-ecfp-TDRD7-3′UTRmut1 (3′TDRD7mut1 in Figure S2).
2612) RazMultiple levels of posttranscriptional control lead to germ line-specific gene expression in the zebrafishCurr.
2619) They are enriched in factors involved in inhibition of translation and lack ribosomes and translation-initiation factors (Liu et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).Importantly, it is becoming increasingly clear that during their biogenesis, the activity of miRNAs is subjected to intense regulation.
2620) To investigate the possibility that RBPs influence the activity of the miRNA pathway, we examined the effect of expression of several RBPs on miR-221-mediated repression of p27.
2621) We found that human dead end 1 (Dnd1), a protein whose function is required for germ cell survival and migration in zebrafish (Weidinger et al., 2003), affects miRNA activity.
2622) To further test whether Dnd1 activity depends on miRNA function we inactivated miRNA synthesis with an shRNA vector targeting Pasha, a component specific to the miRNA pathway (Gregory et al., 2004).
2625) To test whether the effect of Dnd1 on miRNA activity is specific and mediated through its RNA-binding domain, we used expression plasmids of Dnd1 homologs and related genes and found neither to significantly inhibit miR-221-mediated suppression of luciferase-p27 3′UTR (Figure 1D, expression controls shown in Figure S1E).
2627) Collectively, these results suggest that inhibiting miRNA function is specific to Dnd1 and indicate that for counteracting miRNA activity, Dnd1 requires an intact RNA-binding domain.Suppression of gene expression by miRNAs is exerted by translational inhibition that occasionally is associated with mRNA decay (Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
2628) To directly measure the effect of endogenous Dnd1 on the activity of endogenous miR-372 family, we used sensor molecules containing the luciferase gene under the control of either wild-type LATS2-3′UTR or a mutant in the 372 target sites (le Sage et al., 2007 and Voorhoeve et al., 2006).
2629) Western blot analysis with anti-HA confirmed the expression of human and zebrafish proteins, whereas nuclear Cdc6 and cytoplasmic Tubulin verified cellular fractionation (Figure 2A, bottom).An alternative explanation that could account for Dnd1 activity is that the protein binds miRNAs and inhibits their function.
2631) These results are in line with the assumption that Dnd1 counteracts miR-221 activity either at the level of RISC-incorporated-mature miR-221 or downstream, rather than by steric hindrance of miR-221.Next, we checked whether Dnd1 interacts with mature miR-221 or with p27 3′UTR.
2633) To test whether the region in between the two miRNA sites is sufficient to confer Dnd1 activity, we cloned it into a luciferase reporter vector (p27 3′UTR(196–300)).
2638) Nevertheless, our results show that counteracting or balancing miRNA function is important during development, at least to maintain viable and functional germ lines in zebrafish and mouse.Dnd1 and Other RBPsRecent publications have implicated mechanisms that counteract the activity of miRNAs on specific mRNAs (Ashraf et al., 2006, Bhattacharyya et al., 2006 and Schratt et al., 2006).
2640) Whether this is a general mechanism applicable to HuR, or other RBPs, remains to be seen.Counteracting miRNAs and siRNAsOur work shows that Dnd1 activity can counteract gene silencing induced by miRNAs but not by siRNA-mediated RNA interference (RNAi).
2644) Griekspoor et al.A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumorsCell, 124 (2006), pp.
2645) Values of p<0.05 were considered as significant.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Data extracted and analyzed using miRNA body map online website (http://www.mirnabodymap.org/) based on the high throughput microRNA expression analysis in normal tissues.[30](TIF)Click here for additional data file.(496K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsmiRNA library used in the original screen was kindly provided by Reuven Agami.
2646) Hence, mechanisms of autophagy regulation are under exploration.MethodsOver-expression of hsa-miR-376a1 (shortly MIR376A) was performed to evaluate its effects on autophagy.
2647) Endogenous miRNA was blocked using antagomirs and the effects on target expression and autophagy were analyzed.
2648) Differential expression of MIR376A and the related MIR376B was compared using TaqMan quantitative PCR.ResultsHere, we demonstrated that, a microRNA (miRNA) from the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster, MIR376A, played an important role in autophagy regulation.
2650) MIR376A shared the same seed sequence and had overlapping targets with MIR376B, and similarly blocked the expression of key autophagy proteins ATG4C and BECN1 (Beclin 1).
2651) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2652) Among them, MIR376B was introduced as a new regulator of starvation and mTOR-inhibition-related autophagy.[10] MIR376B blocked autophagy by affecting the expression of two key autophagy proteins, namely ATG4C and BECN1.
2653) Overexpression of MIR376A attenuated starvation-induced autophagic activity and did so by modulating cellular ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels.
2655) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
2656) Since in our screen, MIR376A1 was also a hit, we wondered whether this miRNA would regulate autophagy.Figure 1Figure 1MIR376 family miRNAs in the DLKI/GTL2 gene cluster.Firstly, we transiently overexpressed MIR376A1 (MIR376A herein) together with the autophagy marker GFP-LC3 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
2658) To confirm these results with a complementary technique, we analyzed the effect of MIR376A overexpression on the conversion of endogenous free LC3 protein (LC3-I) to its lipidated and autophagic vesicle-associated form (LC3-II).
2659) As seen in Figure 2C, LC3-I conversion to LC3-II was decreased in miRNA transfected MCF-7 cells compared to controls.Figure 2Figure 2Effect of MIR376A overexpression on autophagy.Autophagic cargo receptor protein p62/SQSTM1 is also carried by autophagosomes to lysosomes and degraded there during the process.[18] Indeed, starvation resulted in SQSTM1 degradation in cells transfected with the control miRNAs, and inhibition of the lysosomal enzymes blocked its degradation (Figure 2D).
2661) Similar to the results obtained in MCF-7 cells, MIR376A overexpression could block starvation-induced GFP-LC3 dot formation (Figure 3A and B) and LC3 lipidation (Figure 3C) in Huh7 cells as well.Figure 3Figure 3MIR376A overexpression blocked autophagy in Huh-7 cells.All these results showed that, MIR376A, another gene encoded by the miRNA gene cluster in the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region, was a new miRNA regulator of starvation-activated autophagy.Autophagy-related targets of MIR376AWe have previously described ATG4C and BECN1 as autophagy-related targets of MIR376B.
2662) Indeed, mRNA levels of both genes were decreased upon MIR376A overexpression (Figure 4C and D).
2663) Additionally, MIR376A overexpression led to a decrease in the levels of both ATG4C (Figure 4E) and BECN1 (Figure 4F) proteins.
2664) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2665) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2668) According to Kawahara et.al (2007), miR-376 family members were transcribed as a long primary transcript.[17] Reports by Seitz et al. and Teferedegne et al. confirmed experimentally the presence of a common transcript including MIR376A and MIR376B.[16], [25] In line with these data, a recent study showed that the expression of MIR376A, MIR376B and MIR376C was regulated by a transcription factor called AIRE in a coordinated manner.[26] Although experimental confirmation is currently missing, our bioinformatics analyses revealed that predicted short promoter regions of these two miRNAs could be responsive to overlapping but different transcription factors, indicating that single miRNA transcripts could also co-exist (unpublished data by Ilknur Melis Durasi, Osman Ugur Sezerman and Devrim Gozuacik).
2670) While MIR376B is highly expressed in the spleen and adrenal gland, MIR376A was reported to be abundant in the brain and uterus (Fig. S1).[30] A number of studies in the literature, showed the importance of MIR376A during development and differentiation-related events including erythroid differentiation [31], keratinocyte differentiation [32] and skeletal muscle development.[33] MIR376A was also shown to be upregulated during chemical and replicative senescence in human fibroblasts.[34]Additionally, changes in MIR376 levels were observed under pathological conditions.
2671) While MIR376A was downregulated in esophageal cancer [35] and melanomas [36] and upregulated in salivary gland adenomas,[37] and pancreatic carcinomas,[38], [39] MIR376B was differentially expressed in uterine leiomyomas [40] and renal cell carcinomas.[41] Moreover, changes in MIR376A levels could be used as a marker to distinguish acute myeloid leukemia subtypes, but MIR376B could serve as a breast cancer subtype marker.[42] Additionally, MIR376A and MIR376B were subjected to variable levels of editing in glioblastomas.[43]Autophagy serves as a cellular defense mechanism against various pathogens including viruses.[44], [45] Not surprisingly, as a countermeasure, viruses evolved ways of modulating autophagy during productive and latent stages of the viral infection.[46] miRNAs of both viral and cellular origins were shown to affect cellular responses to viruses such as apoptosis, therefore, it is possible that autophagy-regulating miRNAs play a role in the battle between viruses and the host.
2672) In line with a possible role of MIR376 family in virus-host interactions, a miRNA profiling revealed differential expression of MIR376A and MIR376B in control versus HIV-1 positive peripheral blood mononuclear cells.[47] In another study, an interesting interplay between viral miRNAs and MIR376A was reported.[48] MREs for MIR376A in the 3′ UTR of the MICB mRNA (a stress-induced ligand necessary for host cell recognition and destruction by natural killer cells) overlapped with the MRE of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) miRNA, miR-K12-7.
2673) BECN1 cDNA ORF was cloned into the pcDNA3 mammalian expression plasmid using RT-PCR.Cell culture and transfectionDulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Sigma, D5671) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biochrom KG, S0115) and antibiotics (Penicillin/Streptomycin; Biological Industries, 03-031-1B) were used to culture MCF-7 human mammary carcinoma cells, Huh7 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and 293T human embryonic kidney cells in a 5% CO2-humidified incubator at 37°C.
2674) Minimum 150 GFP positive cells were counted under each condition, and percentage of GFP-LC3 positivity was expressed as a percentage of GFP-LC3 dot positive cells within the total transfected cell population.miRNA target predictionBioinformatics tools, Microcosm Targets (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/enright-srv/microcosm/cgi-bin/targets/v5/search.pl), and MiRanda (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) were utilized to determine miRNA potential target mRNAs.Immunoblotting and antibodiesProtein extracts from cells were prepared and immunoblotted as previously described [53] using antibodies specific to BECN1 (Santa Cruz, sc-11427), LC3B (Novus, NB100-2331), ATG4C (Sigma-Aldrich, AB75056), SQSTM1 (Abnova, H00008878) and ACTB (Sigma-Aldrich, A5441).
2675) Results were expressed as firely luciferase activity normalized to renilla luciferase activity and analyzed as described previously.[10], [11]Antagomir testsmiRIDIAN® microRNA Hairpin Inhibitors (antagomirs) against hsa-miR-376a1 (IH-300683-05-0005) and a control antagomir (miRIDIAN microRNA Hairpin Inhibitor Negative Control (IN-001005-01-05)) were purchased from Dharmacon.
2676) Values of p<0.05 were considered as significant.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Data extracted and analyzed using miRNA body map online website (http://www.mirnabodymap.org/) based on the high throughput microRNA expression analysis in normal tissues.[30](TIF)Click here for additional data file.(496K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsmiRNA library used in the original screen was kindly provided by Reuven Agami.
2679) Macedo C, Evangelista AF, Marques MM, Octacilio-Silva S, Donadi EA, et al. (2013) Autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls the expression of microRNAs in medullary thymic epithelial cells.
2683) Skalsky RL, Cullen BR (2011) Reduced expression of brain-enriched microRNAs in glioblastomas permits targeted regulation of a cell death gene.
2685) Endogenous miRNA was blocked using antagomirs and the effects on target expression and autophagy were analyzed.
2687) MIR376A shared the same seed sequence and had overlapping targets with MIR376B, and similarly blocked the expression of key autophagy proteins ATG4C and BECN1 (Beclin 1).
2688) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2689) We showed that, miRNA response elements (MRE) in the 3′UTR region of these genes were direct targets of MIR376A.
2690) Although the nucleotide sequences of at least seven miRNA genes found in this region differed considerably, the seed sequences (around 8 nucleotide long miRNA core sequences responsible for target mRNA recognition) of MIR376A1, MIR376A2 and MIRB2 were identical to that of the MIR376B (Figure 1B and C).
2691) Similar to the results obtained in MCF-7 cells, MIR376A overexpression could block starvation-induced GFP-LC3 dot formation (Figure 3A and B) and LC3 lipidation (Figure 3C) in Huh7 cells as well.Figure 3Figure 3MIR376A overexpression blocked autophagy in Huh-7 cells.All these results showed that, MIR376A, another gene encoded by the miRNA gene cluster in the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region, was a new miRNA regulator of starvation-activated autophagy.Autophagy-related targets of MIR376AWe have previously described ATG4C and BECN1 as autophagy-related targets of MIR376B.
2693) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2694) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2695) Specific antagomirs against the miRNA led to a clear increase in both ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels, and stimulated autophagic activity in cells.Since ATG4C and BECN1 function at two different steps of autophagic vesicle formation, targeting of both of these key autophagy proteins at once by the MIR376 family of miRNAs allows a robust decrease in the autophagic activity.
2696) In fact, BECN1 was subject to regulation by transcriptional upregulation, protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation and ubiquitination.[19], [20], [21] ATG4 was also reported to be regulated in various ways including transcriptional upregulation and reactive oxygen species [22] Moreover, miRNAs other than MIR376 family were shown to target BECN1 or ATG4 as well.
2699) For example, regulation by DICER was reported to affect the levels of let-7.[27] Moreover, complexes Ago proteins were shown to determine the stability of various miRNAs.[28] Further studies are required to reveal the nature and molecular details of posttranscriptional events that are responsible for the differential regulation of MIR376A and MIR376B levels under stress-inducing conditions.Differential editing of MIR376 family members was reported in a number of tissues.[17] For example, while +44 site in the seed sequence of MIR376A was not edited in the mouse cortex, in the same tissue MIR376B was highly edited (around 50–60%) at this position.[17] Since editing in the seed region was shown to change target specificity of miRNAs including MIR376A*[17], [29] in addition to relative ratios of MIR376A and MIR376B, ratios between edited versus non-edited versions of MIR376 family members might be important factors leading to changes in autophagy levels in different tissues and cells.
2701) Indeed, KSHV was previously shown to downregulate autophagy, apoptosis and cell death using its viral FLIP and BCL-2 proteins that target autophagy-related proteins ATG3 and BECN1, respectively.
2702) Minimum 150 GFP positive cells were counted under each condition, and percentage of GFP-LC3 positivity was expressed as a percentage of GFP-LC3 dot positive cells within the total transfected cell population.miRNA target predictionBioinformatics tools, Microcosm Targets (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/enright-srv/microcosm/cgi-bin/targets/v5/search.pl), and MiRanda (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) were utilized to determine miRNA potential target mRNAs.Immunoblotting and antibodiesProtein extracts from cells were prepared and immunoblotted as previously described [53] using antibodies specific to BECN1 (Santa Cruz, sc-11427), LC3B (Novus, NB100-2331), ATG4C (Sigma-Aldrich, AB75056), SQSTM1 (Abnova, H00008878) and ACTB (Sigma-Aldrich, A5441).
2708) Wang T, Zhang X, Obijuru L, Laser J, Aris V, et al. (2007) A micro-RNA signature associated with race, tumor size, and target gene activity in human uterine leiomyomas.
2709) Skalsky RL, Cullen BR (2011) Reduced expression of brain-enriched microRNAs in glioblastomas permits targeted regulation of a cell death gene.
2710) Wang RC, Wei Y, An Z, Zou Z, Xiao G, et al. (2012) Akt-mediated regulation of autophagy and tumorigenesis through Beclin 1 phosphorylation.
2711) Liu X, Sempere LF, Ouyang H, Memoli VA, Andrew AS, et al. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors.
2712) Wang T, Zhang X, Obijuru L, Laser J, Aris V, et al. (2007) A micro-RNA signature associated with race, tumor size, and target gene activity in human uterine leiomyomas.
2714) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
2715) Since in our screen, MIR376A1 was also a hit, we wondered whether this miRNA would regulate autophagy.Figure 1Figure 1MIR376 family miRNAs in the DLKI/GTL2 gene cluster.Firstly, we transiently overexpressed MIR376A1 (MIR376A herein) together with the autophagy marker GFP-LC3 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
2716) While MIR376A was downregulated in esophageal cancer [35] and melanomas [36] and upregulated in salivary gland adenomas,[37] and pancreatic carcinomas,[38], [39] MIR376B was differentially expressed in uterine leiomyomas [40] and renal cell carcinomas.[41] Moreover, changes in MIR376A levels could be used as a marker to distinguish acute myeloid leukemia subtypes, but MIR376B could serve as a breast cancer subtype marker.[42] Additionally, MIR376A and MIR376B were subjected to variable levels of editing in glioblastomas.[43]Autophagy serves as a cellular defense mechanism against various pathogens including viruses.[44], [45] Not surprisingly, as a countermeasure, viruses evolved ways of modulating autophagy during productive and latent stages of the viral infection.[46] miRNAs of both viral and cellular origins were shown to affect cellular responses to viruses such as apoptosis, therefore, it is possible that autophagy-regulating miRNAs play a role in the battle between viruses and the host.
2717) Liu X, Sempere LF, Ouyang H, Memoli VA, Andrew AS, et al. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors.
2720) Differential expression of MIR376A and the related MIR376B was compared using TaqMan quantitative PCR.ResultsHere, we demonstrated that, a microRNA (miRNA) from the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster, MIR376A, played an important role in autophagy regulation.
2721) Interestingly, MIR376A and MIR376B levels were increased with different kinetics in response to starvation stress and tissue-specific level differences were also observed, pointing out to an overlapping but miRNA-specific biological role.ConclusionsOur findings underline the importance of miRNAs encoded by the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster in stress-response control mechanisms, and introduce MIR376A as a new regulator of autophagy.Go to:IntroductionTwo major degradation pathways, namely macroautophagy (autophagy herein) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, are operational in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
2722) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2723) MIR376B belongs to a miRNA gene family encoded from a gene cluster region in the human chromosome 14q32, called the DLK1/GTL2 region.[15], [16], [17] Therefore, we wondered whether other miRNAs from the same region could play a role in autophagy regulation.Here, we report that another miRNA from the DLK1/GTL2 region, namely hsa-miR-376a1 (hereafter MIR376A) containing a seed sequence similar to that of MIR376B, is a novel regulator of autophagy.
2724) We showed that, miRNA response elements (MRE) in the 3′UTR region of these genes were direct targets of MIR376A.
2725) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
2726) Although the nucleotide sequences of at least seven miRNA genes found in this region differed considerably, the seed sequences (around 8 nucleotide long miRNA core sequences responsible for target mRNA recognition) of MIR376A1, MIR376A2 and MIRB2 were identical to that of the MIR376B (Figure 1B and C).
2727) Since in our screen, MIR376A1 was also a hit, we wondered whether this miRNA would regulate autophagy.Figure 1Figure 1MIR376 family miRNAs in the DLKI/GTL2 gene cluster.Firstly, we transiently overexpressed MIR376A1 (MIR376A herein) together with the autophagy marker GFP-LC3 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
2728) Similar to the results obtained in MCF-7 cells, MIR376A overexpression could block starvation-induced GFP-LC3 dot formation (Figure 3A and B) and LC3 lipidation (Figure 3C) in Huh7 cells as well.Figure 3Figure 3MIR376A overexpression blocked autophagy in Huh-7 cells.All these results showed that, MIR376A, another gene encoded by the miRNA gene cluster in the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region, was a new miRNA regulator of starvation-activated autophagy.Autophagy-related targets of MIR376AWe have previously described ATG4C and BECN1 as autophagy-related targets of MIR376B.
2730) Indeed, mRNA levels of both genes were decreased upon MIR376A overexpression (Figure 4C and D).
2731) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2732) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
2735) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
2736) miRNA-mediated regulation provides a flexible and dynamic mechanism for the regulation of autophagy under various stress conditions, and adds another layer of regulation for critical cell death and survival decisions in health and disease.Go to:Materials and MethodsPlasmid constructsThe pMSCV-blast-miR plasmids, containing either hsa-miR-376a1 human miRNA or control miRNA (hTR-human telomerase RNA), were constructed as described previously.[51] For luciferase tests, miRNA response elements (MRE) located in the 3′UTR of BECN1 or ATG4C genes (ATG4C Genbank accession number: AK027773, bases 2383-2403, and BECN1 Genbank accession number: NM_003766, bases 2030-2051), or their mutant versions were cloned into the 3′UTR region of the luciferase gene in the pGL3 vector (Promega, E1741) as previously described.[10] ATG4C plasmid was purchased from Origene (SC126496).
2740) Wang RC, Wei Y, An Z, Zou Z, Xiao G, et al. (2012) Akt-mediated regulation of autophagy and tumorigenesis through Beclin 1 phosphorylation.
2742) Wang T, Zhang X, Obijuru L, Laser J, Aris V, et al. (2007) A micro-RNA signature associated with race, tumor size, and target gene activity in human uterine leiomyomas.
2743) Skalsky RL, Cullen BR (2011) Reduced expression of brain-enriched microRNAs in glioblastomas permits targeted regulation of a cell death gene.
2744) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
2745) In fact, while BECN1 controls the production of PI3-P and regulates of autophagic vesicle nucleation sites, ATG4 is important for LC3 lipidation and in autophagic vesicle membrane elongation.
2746) For example, regulation by DICER was reported to affect the levels of let-7.[27] Moreover, complexes Ago proteins were shown to determine the stability of various miRNAs.[28] Further studies are required to reveal the nature and molecular details of posttranscriptional events that are responsible for the differential regulation of MIR376A and MIR376B levels under stress-inducing conditions.Differential editing of MIR376 family members was reported in a number of tissues.[17] For example, while +44 site in the seed sequence of MIR376A was not edited in the mouse cortex, in the same tissue MIR376B was highly edited (around 50–60%) at this position.[17] Since editing in the seed region was shown to change target specificity of miRNAs including MIR376A*[17], [29] in addition to relative ratios of MIR376A and MIR376B, ratios between edited versus non-edited versions of MIR376 family members might be important factors leading to changes in autophagy levels in different tissues and cells.
2747) Values of p<0.05 were considered as significant.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Data extracted and analyzed using miRNA body map online website (http://www.mirnabodymap.org/) based on the high throughput microRNA expression analysis in normal tissues.[30](TIF)Click here for additional data file.(496K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsmiRNA library used in the original screen was kindly provided by Reuven Agami.
2748) Hence, mechanisms of autophagy regulation are under exploration.MethodsOver-expression of hsa-miR-376a1 (shortly MIR376A) was performed to evaluate its effects on autophagy.
2749) Differential expression of MIR376A and the related MIR376B was compared using TaqMan quantitative PCR.ResultsHere, we demonstrated that, a microRNA (miRNA) from the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster, MIR376A, played an important role in autophagy regulation.
2750) Interestingly, MIR376A and MIR376B levels were increased with different kinetics in response to starvation stress and tissue-specific level differences were also observed, pointing out to an overlapping but miRNA-specific biological role.ConclusionsOur findings underline the importance of miRNAs encoded by the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster in stress-response control mechanisms, and introduce MIR376A as a new regulator of autophagy.Go to:IntroductionTwo major degradation pathways, namely macroautophagy (autophagy herein) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, are operational in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
2751) Functional at a basal level for long-lived protein degradation and organelle turnover under normal conditions, autophagy is rapidly upregulated in response to both extracellular (e.g. nutrient starvation, hypoxia) and intracellular (e.g. accumulation of unfolded proteins, damaged organelles, pathogens) stress factors.[1] Concerted action of several protein complexes formed by at least 32 different autophagy (ATG) proteins result in the formation of double- or multi-membrane vesicles called autophagic vesicles or autophagosomes.[2] These vesicles enwrap cargo molecules and carry them to lysosomes for degradation, resulting in the recycling of their constituents for reuse by the cell.[3], [4]Protein complexes playing a role in autophagosome formation are numerous.
2752) BECN1 was discovered as a master regulator of the VPS34 activity and autophagosome formation.[2] Autophagic vesicle membrane elongation, growth and closure occur through the action of two ubiqituination-like protein conjugation systems.[5] The first system is rather regulatory, resulting in the covalent conjugation of a ubiquitin-like protein ATG12 to ATG5, and in the eventual formation of a larger complex including the ATG16 protein.
2753) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2754) Among them, MIR376B was introduced as a new regulator of starvation and mTOR-inhibition-related autophagy.[10] MIR376B blocked autophagy by affecting the expression of two key autophagy proteins, namely ATG4C and BECN1.
2755) MIR376B belongs to a miRNA gene family encoded from a gene cluster region in the human chromosome 14q32, called the DLK1/GTL2 region.[15], [16], [17] Therefore, we wondered whether other miRNAs from the same region could play a role in autophagy regulation.Here, we report that another miRNA from the DLK1/GTL2 region, namely hsa-miR-376a1 (hereafter MIR376A) containing a seed sequence similar to that of MIR376B, is a novel regulator of autophagy.
2756) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
2757) Since in our screen, MIR376A1 was also a hit, we wondered whether this miRNA would regulate autophagy.Figure 1Figure 1MIR376 family miRNAs in the DLKI/GTL2 gene cluster.Firstly, we transiently overexpressed MIR376A1 (MIR376A herein) together with the autophagy marker GFP-LC3 in MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
2758) Similar to the results obtained in MCF-7 cells, MIR376A overexpression could block starvation-induced GFP-LC3 dot formation (Figure 3A and B) and LC3 lipidation (Figure 3C) in Huh7 cells as well.Figure 3Figure 3MIR376A overexpression blocked autophagy in Huh-7 cells.All these results showed that, MIR376A, another gene encoded by the miRNA gene cluster in the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region, was a new miRNA regulator of starvation-activated autophagy.Autophagy-related targets of MIR376AWe have previously described ATG4C and BECN1 as autophagy-related targets of MIR376B.
2759) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2760) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2761) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
2764) In fact, while BECN1 controls the production of PI3-P and regulates of autophagic vesicle nucleation sites, ATG4 is important for LC3 lipidation and in autophagic vesicle membrane elongation.
2765) In line with the importance of these proteins in autophagy control, both proteins were reported to be regulated by diverse signals and pathways.
2766) In fact, BECN1 was subject to regulation by transcriptional upregulation, protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation and ubiquitination.[19], [20], [21] ATG4 was also reported to be regulated in various ways including transcriptional upregulation and reactive oxygen species [22] Moreover, miRNAs other than MIR376 family were shown to target BECN1 or ATG4 as well.
2768) According to Kawahara et.al (2007), miR-376 family members were transcribed as a long primary transcript.[17] Reports by Seitz et al. and Teferedegne et al. confirmed experimentally the presence of a common transcript including MIR376A and MIR376B.[16], [25] In line with these data, a recent study showed that the expression of MIR376A, MIR376B and MIR376C was regulated by a transcription factor called AIRE in a coordinated manner.[26] Although experimental confirmation is currently missing, our bioinformatics analyses revealed that predicted short promoter regions of these two miRNAs could be responsive to overlapping but different transcription factors, indicating that single miRNA transcripts could also co-exist (unpublished data by Ilknur Melis Durasi, Osman Ugur Sezerman and Devrim Gozuacik).
2770) For example, regulation by DICER was reported to affect the levels of let-7.[27] Moreover, complexes Ago proteins were shown to determine the stability of various miRNAs.[28] Further studies are required to reveal the nature and molecular details of posttranscriptional events that are responsible for the differential regulation of MIR376A and MIR376B levels under stress-inducing conditions.Differential editing of MIR376 family members was reported in a number of tissues.[17] For example, while +44 site in the seed sequence of MIR376A was not edited in the mouse cortex, in the same tissue MIR376B was highly edited (around 50–60%) at this position.[17] Since editing in the seed region was shown to change target specificity of miRNAs including MIR376A*[17], [29] in addition to relative ratios of MIR376A and MIR376B, ratios between edited versus non-edited versions of MIR376 family members might be important factors leading to changes in autophagy levels in different tissues and cells.
2771) While MIR376B is highly expressed in the spleen and adrenal gland, MIR376A was reported to be abundant in the brain and uterus (Fig. S1).[30] A number of studies in the literature, showed the importance of MIR376A during development and differentiation-related events including erythroid differentiation [31], keratinocyte differentiation [32] and skeletal muscle development.[33] MIR376A was also shown to be upregulated during chemical and replicative senescence in human fibroblasts.[34]Additionally, changes in MIR376 levels were observed under pathological conditions.
2772) While MIR376A was downregulated in esophageal cancer [35] and melanomas [36] and upregulated in salivary gland adenomas,[37] and pancreatic carcinomas,[38], [39] MIR376B was differentially expressed in uterine leiomyomas [40] and renal cell carcinomas.[41] Moreover, changes in MIR376A levels could be used as a marker to distinguish acute myeloid leukemia subtypes, but MIR376B could serve as a breast cancer subtype marker.[42] Additionally, MIR376A and MIR376B were subjected to variable levels of editing in glioblastomas.[43]Autophagy serves as a cellular defense mechanism against various pathogens including viruses.[44], [45] Not surprisingly, as a countermeasure, viruses evolved ways of modulating autophagy during productive and latent stages of the viral infection.[46] miRNAs of both viral and cellular origins were shown to affect cellular responses to viruses such as apoptosis, therefore, it is possible that autophagy-regulating miRNAs play a role in the battle between viruses and the host.
2774) In the light of our data, here contribution of MIR376A to viral infection might not be limited to the attenuation of immune responses through MICB downregulation, but it might also involve blockage of antiviral autophagic degradation, autophagy-related antigen presentation on MHC molecules and perhaps autophagic cell death.
2775) Indeed, KSHV was previously shown to downregulate autophagy, apoptosis and cell death using its viral FLIP and BCL-2 proteins that target autophagy-related proteins ATG3 and BECN1, respectively.
2776) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
2777) miRNA-mediated regulation provides a flexible and dynamic mechanism for the regulation of autophagy under various stress conditions, and adds another layer of regulation for critical cell death and survival decisions in health and disease.Go to:Materials and MethodsPlasmid constructsThe pMSCV-blast-miR plasmids, containing either hsa-miR-376a1 human miRNA or control miRNA (hTR-human telomerase RNA), were constructed as described previously.[51] For luciferase tests, miRNA response elements (MRE) located in the 3′UTR of BECN1 or ATG4C genes (ATG4C Genbank accession number: AK027773, bases 2383-2403, and BECN1 Genbank accession number: NM_003766, bases 2030-2051), or their mutant versions were cloned into the 3′UTR region of the luciferase gene in the pGL3 vector (Promega, E1741) as previously described.[10] ATG4C plasmid was purchased from Origene (SC126496).
2780) Wang RC, Wei Y, An Z, Zou Z, Xiao G, et al. (2012) Akt-mediated regulation of autophagy and tumorigenesis through Beclin 1 phosphorylation.
2781) Scherz-Shouval R, Shvets E, Fass E, Shorer H, Gil L, et al. (2007) Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4.
2782) Macedo C, Evangelista AF, Marques MM, Octacilio-Silva S, Donadi EA, et al. (2013) Autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls the expression of microRNAs in medullary thymic epithelial cells.
2787) Skalsky RL, Cullen BR (2011) Reduced expression of brain-enriched microRNAs in glioblastomas permits targeted regulation of a cell death gene.
2788) Duskova K, Nagilla P, Le HS, Iyer P, Thalamuthu A, et al. (2013) MicroRNA regulation and its effects on cellular transcriptome in human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infected individuals with distinct viral load and CD4 cell counts.
2791) Oral O, Oz-Arslan D, Itah Z, Naghavi A, Deveci R, et al. (2012) Cleavage of Atg3 protein by caspase-8 regulates autophagy during receptor-activated cell death.
2792) Functional at a basal level for long-lived protein degradation and organelle turnover under normal conditions, autophagy is rapidly upregulated in response to both extracellular (e.g. nutrient starvation, hypoxia) and intracellular (e.g. accumulation of unfolded proteins, damaged organelles, pathogens) stress factors.[1] Concerted action of several protein complexes formed by at least 32 different autophagy (ATG) proteins result in the formation of double- or multi-membrane vesicles called autophagic vesicles or autophagosomes.[2] These vesicles enwrap cargo molecules and carry them to lysosomes for degradation, resulting in the recycling of their constituents for reuse by the cell.[3], [4]Protein complexes playing a role in autophagosome formation are numerous.
2793) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2823) To confirm these results with a complementary technique, we analyzed the effect of MIR376A overexpression on the conversion of endogenous free LC3 protein (LC3-I) to its lipidated and autophagic vesicle-associated form (LC3-II).
2853) Minimum 150 GFP positive cells were counted under each condition, and percentage of GFP-LC3 positivity was expressed as a percentage of GFP-LC3 dot positive cells within the total transfected cell population.miRNA target predictionBioinformatics tools, Microcosm Targets (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/enright-srv/microcosm/cgi-bin/targets/v5/search.pl), and MiRanda (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) were utilized to determine miRNA potential target mRNAs.Immunoblotting and antibodiesProtein extracts from cells were prepared and immunoblotted as previously described [53] using antibodies specific to BECN1 (Santa Cruz, sc-11427), LC3B (Novus, NB100-2331), ATG4C (Sigma-Aldrich, AB75056), SQSTM1 (Abnova, H00008878) and ACTB (Sigma-Aldrich, A5441).
2854) 2013; 8(12): e82556.Published online Dec 16, 2013. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0082556PMCID: PMC3864973MIR376A Is a Regulator of Starvation-Induced AutophagyGozde Korkmaz,#¤ Kumsal Ayse Tekirdag,# Deniz Gulfem Ozturk, Ali Kosar, Osman Ugur Sezerman, and Devrim Gozuacik*Sebastien Pfeffer, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►Go to:AbstractBackgroundAutophagy is a vesicular trafficking process responsible for the degradation of long-lived, misfolded or abnormal proteins, as well as damaged or surplus organelles.
2855) Abnormalities of the autophagic activity may result in the accumulation of protein aggregates, organelle dysfunction, and autophagy disorders were associated with various diseases.
2856) MIR376A shared the same seed sequence and had overlapping targets with MIR376B, and similarly blocked the expression of key autophagy proteins ATG4C and BECN1 (Beclin 1).
2859) Functional at a basal level for long-lived protein degradation and organelle turnover under normal conditions, autophagy is rapidly upregulated in response to both extracellular (e.g. nutrient starvation, hypoxia) and intracellular (e.g. accumulation of unfolded proteins, damaged organelles, pathogens) stress factors.[1] Concerted action of several protein complexes formed by at least 32 different autophagy (ATG) proteins result in the formation of double- or multi-membrane vesicles called autophagic vesicles or autophagosomes.[2] These vesicles enwrap cargo molecules and carry them to lysosomes for degradation, resulting in the recycling of their constituents for reuse by the cell.[3], [4]Protein complexes playing a role in autophagosome formation are numerous.
2860) BECN1 was discovered as a master regulator of the VPS34 activity and autophagosome formation.[2] Autophagic vesicle membrane elongation, growth and closure occur through the action of two ubiqituination-like protein conjugation systems.[5] The first system is rather regulatory, resulting in the covalent conjugation of a ubiquitin-like protein ATG12 to ATG5, and in the eventual formation of a larger complex including the ATG16 protein.
2862) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2863) Among them, MIR376B was introduced as a new regulator of starvation and mTOR-inhibition-related autophagy.[10] MIR376B blocked autophagy by affecting the expression of two key autophagy proteins, namely ATG4C and BECN1.
2864) Overexpression of MIR376A attenuated starvation-induced autophagic activity and did so by modulating cellular ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels.
2865) Detection of cytoplasmic puncta formation by otherwise soluble GFP-fused MAP1LC3 (shortly LC3) protein is a commonly used method to follow autophagy activation using microscopy.
2866) To confirm these results with a complementary technique, we analyzed the effect of MIR376A overexpression on the conversion of endogenous free LC3 protein (LC3-I) to its lipidated and autophagic vesicle-associated form (LC3-II).
2867) As seen in Figure 2C, LC3-I conversion to LC3-II was decreased in miRNA transfected MCF-7 cells compared to controls.Figure 2Figure 2Effect of MIR376A overexpression on autophagy.Autophagic cargo receptor protein p62/SQSTM1 is also carried by autophagosomes to lysosomes and degraded there during the process.[18] Indeed, starvation resulted in SQSTM1 degradation in cells transfected with the control miRNAs, and inhibition of the lysosomal enzymes blocked its degradation (Figure 2D).
2868) Additionally, MIR376A overexpression led to a decrease in the levels of both ATG4C (Figure 4E) and BECN1 (Figure 4F) proteins.
2869) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2870) While control antagomirs (CNT-Ant) showed no significant effect, introduction of MIR376A-specific antagomirs (Ant-376A) into cells led to a significant increase in ATG4C mRNA (Figure 5A) and protein levels (Figure 5C).
2872) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2874) Specific antagomirs against the miRNA led to a clear increase in both ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels, and stimulated autophagic activity in cells.Since ATG4C and BECN1 function at two different steps of autophagic vesicle formation, targeting of both of these key autophagy proteins at once by the MIR376 family of miRNAs allows a robust decrease in the autophagic activity.
2875) In line with the importance of these proteins in autophagy control, both proteins were reported to be regulated by diverse signals and pathways.
2876) In fact, BECN1 was subject to regulation by transcriptional upregulation, protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation and ubiquitination.[19], [20], [21] ATG4 was also reported to be regulated in various ways including transcriptional upregulation and reactive oxygen species [22] Moreover, miRNAs other than MIR376 family were shown to target BECN1 or ATG4 as well.
2877) For example, regulation by DICER was reported to affect the levels of let-7.[27] Moreover, complexes Ago proteins were shown to determine the stability of various miRNAs.[28] Further studies are required to reveal the nature and molecular details of posttranscriptional events that are responsible for the differential regulation of MIR376A and MIR376B levels under stress-inducing conditions.Differential editing of MIR376 family members was reported in a number of tissues.[17] For example, while +44 site in the seed sequence of MIR376A was not edited in the mouse cortex, in the same tissue MIR376B was highly edited (around 50–60%) at this position.[17] Since editing in the seed region was shown to change target specificity of miRNAs including MIR376A*[17], [29] in addition to relative ratios of MIR376A and MIR376B, ratios between edited versus non-edited versions of MIR376 family members might be important factors leading to changes in autophagy levels in different tissues and cells.
2878) Indeed, KSHV was previously shown to downregulate autophagy, apoptosis and cell death using its viral FLIP and BCL-2 proteins that target autophagy-related proteins ATG3 and BECN1, respectively.
2883) Oral O, Oz-Arslan D, Itah Z, Naghavi A, Deveci R, et al. (2012) Cleavage of Atg3 protein by caspase-8 regulates autophagy during receptor-activated cell death.
2884) MIR376B belongs to a miRNA gene family encoded from a gene cluster region in the human chromosome 14q32, called the DLK1/GTL2 region.[15], [16], [17] Therefore, we wondered whether other miRNAs from the same region could play a role in autophagy regulation.Here, we report that another miRNA from the DLK1/GTL2 region, namely hsa-miR-376a1 (hereafter MIR376A) containing a seed sequence similar to that of MIR376B, is a novel regulator of autophagy.
2885) While MIR376B is highly expressed in the spleen and adrenal gland, MIR376A was reported to be abundant in the brain and uterus (Fig. S1).[30] A number of studies in the literature, showed the importance of MIR376A during development and differentiation-related events including erythroid differentiation [31], keratinocyte differentiation [32] and skeletal muscle development.[33] MIR376A was also shown to be upregulated during chemical and replicative senescence in human fibroblasts.[34]Additionally, changes in MIR376 levels were observed under pathological conditions.
2887) miRNA-mediated regulation provides a flexible and dynamic mechanism for the regulation of autophagy under various stress conditions, and adds another layer of regulation for critical cell death and survival decisions in health and disease.Go to:Materials and MethodsPlasmid constructsThe pMSCV-blast-miR plasmids, containing either hsa-miR-376a1 human miRNA or control miRNA (hTR-human telomerase RNA), were constructed as described previously.[51] For luciferase tests, miRNA response elements (MRE) located in the 3′UTR of BECN1 or ATG4C genes (ATG4C Genbank accession number: AK027773, bases 2383-2403, and BECN1 Genbank accession number: NM_003766, bases 2030-2051), or their mutant versions were cloned into the 3′UTR region of the luciferase gene in the pGL3 vector (Promega, E1741) as previously described.[10] ATG4C plasmid was purchased from Origene (SC126496).
2888) BECN1 cDNA ORF was cloned into the pcDNA3 mammalian expression plasmid using RT-PCR.Cell culture and transfectionDulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Sigma, D5671) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biochrom KG, S0115) and antibiotics (Penicillin/Streptomycin; Biological Industries, 03-031-1B) were used to culture MCF-7 human mammary carcinoma cells, Huh7 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and 293T human embryonic kidney cells in a 5% CO2-humidified incubator at 37°C.
2893) Liu X, Sempere LF, Ouyang H, Memoli VA, Andrew AS, et al. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors.
2894) Wang T, Zhang X, Obijuru L, Laser J, Aris V, et al. (2007) A micro-RNA signature associated with race, tumor size, and target gene activity in human uterine leiomyomas.
2896) Duskova K, Nagilla P, Le HS, Iyer P, Thalamuthu A, et al. (2013) MicroRNA regulation and its effects on cellular transcriptome in human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infected individuals with distinct viral load and CD4 cell counts.
2899) Interestingly, MIR376A and MIR376B levels were increased with different kinetics in response to starvation stress and tissue-specific level differences were also observed, pointing out to an overlapping but miRNA-specific biological role.ConclusionsOur findings underline the importance of miRNAs encoded by the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster in stress-response control mechanisms, and introduce MIR376A as a new regulator of autophagy.Go to:IntroductionTwo major degradation pathways, namely macroautophagy (autophagy herein) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, are operational in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
2900) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
2901) As seen in Figure 2C, LC3-I conversion to LC3-II was decreased in miRNA transfected MCF-7 cells compared to controls.Figure 2Figure 2Effect of MIR376A overexpression on autophagy.Autophagic cargo receptor protein p62/SQSTM1 is also carried by autophagosomes to lysosomes and degraded there during the process.[18] Indeed, starvation resulted in SQSTM1 degradation in cells transfected with the control miRNAs, and inhibition of the lysosomal enzymes blocked its degradation (Figure 2D).
2902) While control antagomirs (CNT-Ant) showed no significant effect, introduction of MIR376A-specific antagomirs (Ant-376A) into cells led to a significant increase in ATG4C mRNA (Figure 5A) and protein levels (Figure 5C).
2903) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
2905) These results underlined the importance of endogenous MIR376A activity in the control of the amplitude of starvation-induced autophagy responses of cells.Figure 7Figure 7Endogenous MIR376A limits starvation-induced autophagy.Response of endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels to starvationWe have previously reported that autophagy-related miRNAs accumulated following starvation or mTOR inhibition.[10], [11] To check whether endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels were similarly increased during starvation stress, we performed a kinetic analysis using TaqMan qPCR.
2907) In fact, while BECN1 controls the production of PI3-P and regulates of autophagic vesicle nucleation sites, ATG4 is important for LC3 lipidation and in autophagic vesicle membrane elongation.
2908) In line with the importance of these proteins in autophagy control, both proteins were reported to be regulated by diverse signals and pathways.
2909) Results presented here provide evidence that, the physiological function of these miRNAs is to control and limit the amplitude of autophagic activity which is strongly stimulated by starvation stress.
2910) A sequential accumulation of individual miRNAs might allow a sustained and a two-step control of the autophagic activity depending on the duration of stress.
2911) Since uncontrolled autophagic activity could be detrimental for cells, and under certain conditions lead to cell death [24] restriction of aberrant activation of autophagy by miRNAs under stressful conditions might prevent cellular demise and give cells a chance to recover a transient stress.Data presented here point out to the presence of distinct control mechanisms resulting in dissimilar MIR376A and MIR376B response kinetics.
2912) In line with a possible role of MIR376 family in virus-host interactions, a miRNA profiling revealed differential expression of MIR376A and MIR376B in control versus HIV-1 positive peripheral blood mononuclear cells.[47] In another study, an interesting interplay between viral miRNAs and MIR376A was reported.[48] MREs for MIR376A in the 3′ UTR of the MICB mRNA (a stress-induced ligand necessary for host cell recognition and destruction by natural killer cells) overlapped with the MRE of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) miRNA, miR-K12-7.
2913) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
2914) miRNA-mediated regulation provides a flexible and dynamic mechanism for the regulation of autophagy under various stress conditions, and adds another layer of regulation for critical cell death and survival decisions in health and disease.Go to:Materials and MethodsPlasmid constructsThe pMSCV-blast-miR plasmids, containing either hsa-miR-376a1 human miRNA or control miRNA (hTR-human telomerase RNA), were constructed as described previously.[51] For luciferase tests, miRNA response elements (MRE) located in the 3′UTR of BECN1 or ATG4C genes (ATG4C Genbank accession number: AK027773, bases 2383-2403, and BECN1 Genbank accession number: NM_003766, bases 2030-2051), or their mutant versions were cloned into the 3′UTR region of the luciferase gene in the pGL3 vector (Promega, E1741) as previously described.[10] ATG4C plasmid was purchased from Origene (SC126496).
2916) Results were expressed as firely luciferase activity normalized to renilla luciferase activity and analyzed as described previously.[10], [11]Antagomir testsmiRIDIAN® microRNA Hairpin Inhibitors (antagomirs) against hsa-miR-376a1 (IH-300683-05-0005) and a control antagomir (miRIDIAN microRNA Hairpin Inhibitor Negative Control (IN-001005-01-05)) were purchased from Dharmacon.
2918) Macedo C, Evangelista AF, Marques MM, Octacilio-Silva S, Donadi EA, et al. (2013) Autoimmune regulator (Aire) controls the expression of microRNAs in medullary thymic epithelial cells.
2920) 2013; 8(12): e82556.Published online Dec 16, 2013. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0082556PMCID: PMC3864973MIR376A Is a Regulator of Starvation-Induced AutophagyGozde Korkmaz,#¤ Kumsal Ayse Tekirdag,# Deniz Gulfem Ozturk, Ali Kosar, Osman Ugur Sezerman, and Devrim Gozuacik*Sebastien Pfeffer, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►Go to:AbstractBackgroundAutophagy is a vesicular trafficking process responsible for the degradation of long-lived, misfolded or abnormal proteins, as well as damaged or surplus organelles.
2921) Interestingly, MIR376A and MIR376B levels were increased with different kinetics in response to starvation stress and tissue-specific level differences were also observed, pointing out to an overlapping but miRNA-specific biological role.ConclusionsOur findings underline the importance of miRNAs encoded by the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster in stress-response control mechanisms, and introduce MIR376A as a new regulator of autophagy.Go to:IntroductionTwo major degradation pathways, namely macroautophagy (autophagy herein) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, are operational in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
2922) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
2923) These results underlined the importance of endogenous MIR376A activity in the control of the amplitude of starvation-induced autophagy responses of cells.Figure 7Figure 7Endogenous MIR376A limits starvation-induced autophagy.Response of endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels to starvationWe have previously reported that autophagy-related miRNAs accumulated following starvation or mTOR inhibition.[10], [11] To check whether endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels were similarly increased during starvation stress, we performed a kinetic analysis using TaqMan qPCR.
2924) In line with the importance of these proteins in autophagy control, both proteins were reported to be regulated by diverse signals and pathways.
2926) According to Kawahara et.al (2007), miR-376 family members were transcribed as a long primary transcript.[17] Reports by Seitz et al. and Teferedegne et al. confirmed experimentally the presence of a common transcript including MIR376A and MIR376B.[16], [25] In line with these data, a recent study showed that the expression of MIR376A, MIR376B and MIR376C was regulated by a transcription factor called AIRE in a coordinated manner.[26] Although experimental confirmation is currently missing, our bioinformatics analyses revealed that predicted short promoter regions of these two miRNAs could be responsive to overlapping but different transcription factors, indicating that single miRNA transcripts could also co-exist (unpublished data by Ilknur Melis Durasi, Osman Ugur Sezerman and Devrim Gozuacik).
2927) In line with a possible role of MIR376 family in virus-host interactions, a miRNA profiling revealed differential expression of MIR376A and MIR376B in control versus HIV-1 positive peripheral blood mononuclear cells.[47] In another study, an interesting interplay between viral miRNAs and MIR376A was reported.[48] MREs for MIR376A in the 3′ UTR of the MICB mRNA (a stress-induced ligand necessary for host cell recognition and destruction by natural killer cells) overlapped with the MRE of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) miRNA, miR-K12-7.
2928) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
2929) Values of p<0.05 were considered as significant.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Data extracted and analyzed using miRNA body map online website (http://www.mirnabodymap.org/) based on the high throughput microRNA expression analysis in normal tissues.[30](TIF)Click here for additional data file.(496K, tif)Go to:AcknowledgmentsmiRNA library used in the original screen was kindly provided by Reuven Agami.
2931) 2013; 8(12): e82556.Published online Dec 16, 2013. doi:  10.1371/journal.pone.0082556PMCID: PMC3864973MIR376A Is a Regulator of Starvation-Induced AutophagyGozde Korkmaz,#¤ Kumsal Ayse Tekirdag,# Deniz Gulfem Ozturk, Ali Kosar, Osman Ugur Sezerman, and Devrim Gozuacik*Sebastien Pfeffer, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►Go to:AbstractBackgroundAutophagy is a vesicular trafficking process responsible for the degradation of long-lived, misfolded or abnormal proteins, as well as damaged or surplus organelles.
2932) Hence, mechanisms of autophagy regulation are under exploration.MethodsOver-expression of hsa-miR-376a1 (shortly MIR376A) was performed to evaluate its effects on autophagy.
2933) Endogenous miRNA was blocked using antagomirs and the effects on target expression and autophagy were analyzed.
2934) MIR376A shared the same seed sequence and had overlapping targets with MIR376B, and similarly blocked the expression of key autophagy proteins ATG4C and BECN1 (Beclin 1).
2935) Interestingly, MIR376A and MIR376B levels were increased with different kinetics in response to starvation stress and tissue-specific level differences were also observed, pointing out to an overlapping but miRNA-specific biological role.ConclusionsOur findings underline the importance of miRNAs encoded by the DLK1/GTL2 gene cluster in stress-response control mechanisms, and introduce MIR376A as a new regulator of autophagy.Go to:IntroductionTwo major degradation pathways, namely macroautophagy (autophagy herein) and the ubiquitin-proteasome system, are operational in the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
2936) Functional at a basal level for long-lived protein degradation and organelle turnover under normal conditions, autophagy is rapidly upregulated in response to both extracellular (e.g. nutrient starvation, hypoxia) and intracellular (e.g. accumulation of unfolded proteins, damaged organelles, pathogens) stress factors.[1] Concerted action of several protein complexes formed by at least 32 different autophagy (ATG) proteins result in the formation of double- or multi-membrane vesicles called autophagic vesicles or autophagosomes.[2] These vesicles enwrap cargo molecules and carry them to lysosomes for degradation, resulting in the recycling of their constituents for reuse by the cell.[3], [4]Protein complexes playing a role in autophagosome formation are numerous.
2939) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
2940) Among them, MIR376B was introduced as a new regulator of starvation and mTOR-inhibition-related autophagy.[10] MIR376B blocked autophagy by affecting the expression of two key autophagy proteins, namely ATG4C and BECN1.
2941) We showed that, miRNA response elements (MRE) in the 3′UTR region of these genes were direct targets of MIR376A.
2942) Although the nucleotide sequences of at least seven miRNA genes found in this region differed considerably, the seed sequences (around 8 nucleotide long miRNA core sequences responsible for target mRNA recognition) of MIR376A1, MIR376A2 and MIRB2 were identical to that of the MIR376B (Figure 1B and C).
2943) Detection of cytoplasmic puncta formation by otherwise soluble GFP-fused MAP1LC3 (shortly LC3) protein is a commonly used method to follow autophagy activation using microscopy.
2944) To confirm these results with a complementary technique, we analyzed the effect of MIR376A overexpression on the conversion of endogenous free LC3 protein (LC3-I) to its lipidated and autophagic vesicle-associated form (LC3-II).
2945) As seen in Figure 2C, LC3-I conversion to LC3-II was decreased in miRNA transfected MCF-7 cells compared to controls.Figure 2Figure 2Effect of MIR376A overexpression on autophagy.Autophagic cargo receptor protein p62/SQSTM1 is also carried by autophagosomes to lysosomes and degraded there during the process.[18] Indeed, starvation resulted in SQSTM1 degradation in cells transfected with the control miRNAs, and inhibition of the lysosomal enzymes blocked its degradation (Figure 2D).
2946) Indeed, mRNA levels of both genes were decreased upon MIR376A overexpression (Figure 4C and D).
2947) Additionally, MIR376A overexpression led to a decrease in the levels of both ATG4C (Figure 4E) and BECN1 (Figure 4F) proteins.
2948) Therefore, similar to MIR376B, MIR376A could also regulate expression levels of two key proteins in the autophagy pathway.Figure 4Figure 4ATG4C and BECN1 were targets of MIR376A.Effect of MIR376A antagomirs on ATG4C and BECN1 levelsTo check whether blockage of the endogenous miRNA would affect ATG4C and BECN1 expression levels, we used antagomirs (chemically engineered oligonucleotide anti-miRNAs) specifically neutralizing MIR376A.
2949) While control antagomirs (CNT-Ant) showed no significant effect, introduction of MIR376A-specific antagomirs (Ant-376A) into cells led to a significant increase in ATG4C mRNA (Figure 5A) and protein levels (Figure 5C).
2950) Therefore, endogenously expressed cellular MIR376A also played a role in the suppression of autophagy-related gene expression.Figure 5Figure 5Effect of antagomirs on MIR376A target expression.MIR376A directly targeted ATG4C and BECN1 3′ UTR sequencesTo prove that negative regulation of the autophagy proteins by MIR376A was a result of a direct effect of the miRNA, reporter luciferase vectors containing predicted 3′ UTR MRE sequences in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNAs were prepared.
2955) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
2957) These results underlined the importance of endogenous MIR376A activity in the control of the amplitude of starvation-induced autophagy responses of cells.Figure 7Figure 7Endogenous MIR376A limits starvation-induced autophagy.Response of endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels to starvationWe have previously reported that autophagy-related miRNAs accumulated following starvation or mTOR inhibition.[10], [11] To check whether endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels were similarly increased during starvation stress, we performed a kinetic analysis using TaqMan qPCR.
2961) Specific antagomirs against the miRNA led to a clear increase in both ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels, and stimulated autophagic activity in cells.Since ATG4C and BECN1 function at two different steps of autophagic vesicle formation, targeting of both of these key autophagy proteins at once by the MIR376 family of miRNAs allows a robust decrease in the autophagic activity.
2962) In fact, BECN1 was subject to regulation by transcriptional upregulation, protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation and ubiquitination.[19], [20], [21] ATG4 was also reported to be regulated in various ways including transcriptional upregulation and reactive oxygen species [22] Moreover, miRNAs other than MIR376 family were shown to target BECN1 or ATG4 as well.
2965) Since uncontrolled autophagic activity could be detrimental for cells, and under certain conditions lead to cell death [24] restriction of aberrant activation of autophagy by miRNAs under stressful conditions might prevent cellular demise and give cells a chance to recover a transient stress.Data presented here point out to the presence of distinct control mechanisms resulting in dissimilar MIR376A and MIR376B response kinetics.
2967) According to Kawahara et.al (2007), miR-376 family members were transcribed as a long primary transcript.[17] Reports by Seitz et al. and Teferedegne et al. confirmed experimentally the presence of a common transcript including MIR376A and MIR376B.[16], [25] In line with these data, a recent study showed that the expression of MIR376A, MIR376B and MIR376C was regulated by a transcription factor called AIRE in a coordinated manner.[26] Although experimental confirmation is currently missing, our bioinformatics analyses revealed that predicted short promoter regions of these two miRNAs could be responsive to overlapping but different transcription factors, indicating that single miRNA transcripts could also co-exist (unpublished data by Ilknur Melis Durasi, Osman Ugur Sezerman and Devrim Gozuacik).
2969) For example, regulation by DICER was reported to affect the levels of let-7.[27] Moreover, complexes Ago proteins were shown to determine the stability of various miRNAs.[28] Further studies are required to reveal the nature and molecular details of posttranscriptional events that are responsible for the differential regulation of MIR376A and MIR376B levels under stress-inducing conditions.Differential editing of MIR376 family members was reported in a number of tissues.[17] For example, while +44 site in the seed sequence of MIR376A was not edited in the mouse cortex, in the same tissue MIR376B was highly edited (around 50–60%) at this position.[17] Since editing in the seed region was shown to change target specificity of miRNAs including MIR376A*[17], [29] in addition to relative ratios of MIR376A and MIR376B, ratios between edited versus non-edited versions of MIR376 family members might be important factors leading to changes in autophagy levels in different tissues and cells.
2971) While MIR376A was downregulated in esophageal cancer [35] and melanomas [36] and upregulated in salivary gland adenomas,[37] and pancreatic carcinomas,[38], [39] MIR376B was differentially expressed in uterine leiomyomas [40] and renal cell carcinomas.[41] Moreover, changes in MIR376A levels could be used as a marker to distinguish acute myeloid leukemia subtypes, but MIR376B could serve as a breast cancer subtype marker.[42] Additionally, MIR376A and MIR376B were subjected to variable levels of editing in glioblastomas.[43]Autophagy serves as a cellular defense mechanism against various pathogens including viruses.[44], [45] Not surprisingly, as a countermeasure, viruses evolved ways of modulating autophagy during productive and latent stages of the viral infection.[46] miRNAs of both viral and cellular origins were shown to affect cellular responses to viruses such as apoptosis, therefore, it is possible that autophagy-regulating miRNAs play a role in the battle between viruses and the host.
2972) In line with a possible role of MIR376 family in virus-host interactions, a miRNA profiling revealed differential expression of MIR376A and MIR376B in control versus HIV-1 positive peripheral blood mononuclear cells.[47] In another study, an interesting interplay between viral miRNAs and MIR376A was reported.[48] MREs for MIR376A in the 3′ UTR of the MICB mRNA (a stress-induced ligand necessary for host cell recognition and destruction by natural killer cells) overlapped with the MRE of Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) miRNA, miR-K12-7.
2973) In the light of our data, here contribution of MIR376A to viral infection might not be limited to the attenuation of immune responses through MICB downregulation, but it might also involve blockage of antiviral autophagic degradation, autophagy-related antigen presentation on MHC molecules and perhaps autophagic cell death.
2974) Indeed, KSHV was previously shown to downregulate autophagy, apoptosis and cell death using its viral FLIP and BCL-2 proteins that target autophagy-related proteins ATG3 and BECN1, respectively.
2975) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
2976) miRNA-mediated regulation provides a flexible and dynamic mechanism for the regulation of autophagy under various stress conditions, and adds another layer of regulation for critical cell death and survival decisions in health and disease.Go to:Materials and MethodsPlasmid constructsThe pMSCV-blast-miR plasmids, containing either hsa-miR-376a1 human miRNA or control miRNA (hTR-human telomerase RNA), were constructed as described previously.[51] For luciferase tests, miRNA response elements (MRE) located in the 3′UTR of BECN1 or ATG4C genes (ATG4C Genbank accession number: AK027773, bases 2383-2403, and BECN1 Genbank accession number: NM_003766, bases 2030-2051), or their mutant versions were cloned into the 3′UTR region of the luciferase gene in the pGL3 vector (Promega, E1741) as previously described.[10] ATG4C plasmid was purchased from Origene (SC126496).
2977) BECN1 cDNA ORF was cloned into the pcDNA3 mammalian expression plasmid using RT-PCR.Cell culture and transfectionDulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Sigma, D5671) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biochrom KG, S0115) and antibiotics (Penicillin/Streptomycin; Biological Industries, 03-031-1B) were used to culture MCF-7 human mammary carcinoma cells, Huh7 human hepatocellular carcinoma cells and 293T human embryonic kidney cells in a 5% CO2-humidified incubator at 37°C.
2979) 10 or 15 GFP-LC3 dots per cell were considered as a threshold for the basal autophagic activity in MCF-7 and Huh7 cells, respectively.
2980) Minimum 150 GFP positive cells were counted under each condition, and percentage of GFP-LC3 positivity was expressed as a percentage of GFP-LC3 dot positive cells within the total transfected cell population.miRNA target predictionBioinformatics tools, Microcosm Targets (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/enright-srv/microcosm/cgi-bin/targets/v5/search.pl), and MiRanda (http://www.microrna.org/microrna/home.do) were utilized to determine miRNA potential target mRNAs.Immunoblotting and antibodiesProtein extracts from cells were prepared and immunoblotted as previously described [53] using antibodies specific to BECN1 (Santa Cruz, sc-11427), LC3B (Novus, NB100-2331), ATG4C (Sigma-Aldrich, AB75056), SQSTM1 (Abnova, H00008878) and ACTB (Sigma-Aldrich, A5441).
2991) Wang RC, Wei Y, An Z, Zou Z, Xiao G, et al. (2012) Akt-mediated regulation of autophagy and tumorigenesis through Beclin 1 phosphorylation.
2993) Scherz-Shouval R, Shvets E, Fass E, Shorer H, Gil L, et al. (2007) Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4.
2996) Liu X, Sempere LF, Ouyang H, Memoli VA, Andrew AS, et al. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors.
2998) Duskova K, Nagilla P, Le HS, Iyer P, Thalamuthu A, et al. (2013) MicroRNA regulation and its effects on cellular transcriptome in human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infected individuals with distinct viral load and CD4 cell counts.
3002) Oral O, Oz-Arslan D, Itah Z, Naghavi A, Deveci R, et al. (2012) Cleavage of Atg3 protein by caspase-8 regulates autophagy during receptor-activated cell death.
3003) Abnormalities of the autophagic activity may result in the accumulation of protein aggregates, organelle dysfunction, and autophagy disorders were associated with various diseases.
3005) BECN1 was discovered as a master regulator of the VPS34 activity and autophagosome formation.[2] Autophagic vesicle membrane elongation, growth and closure occur through the action of two ubiqituination-like protein conjugation systems.[5] The first system is rather regulatory, resulting in the covalent conjugation of a ubiquitin-like protein ATG12 to ATG5, and in the eventual formation of a larger complex including the ATG16 protein.
3006) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
3007) Overexpression of MIR376A attenuated starvation-induced autophagic activity and did so by modulating cellular ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels.
3008) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
3009) Detection of cytoplasmic puncta formation by otherwise soluble GFP-fused MAP1LC3 (shortly LC3) protein is a commonly used method to follow autophagy activation using microscopy.
3011) Similar to the results obtained in MCF-7 cells, MIR376A overexpression could block starvation-induced GFP-LC3 dot formation (Figure 3A and B) and LC3 lipidation (Figure 3C) in Huh7 cells as well.Figure 3Figure 3MIR376A overexpression blocked autophagy in Huh-7 cells.All these results showed that, MIR376A, another gene encoded by the miRNA gene cluster in the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region, was a new miRNA regulator of starvation-activated autophagy.Autophagy-related targets of MIR376AWe have previously described ATG4C and BECN1 as autophagy-related targets of MIR376B.
3013) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
3014) These results underlined the importance of endogenous MIR376A activity in the control of the amplitude of starvation-induced autophagy responses of cells.Figure 7Figure 7Endogenous MIR376A limits starvation-induced autophagy.Response of endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels to starvationWe have previously reported that autophagy-related miRNAs accumulated following starvation or mTOR inhibition.[10], [11] To check whether endogenous MIR376A and MIR376B levels were similarly increased during starvation stress, we performed a kinetic analysis using TaqMan qPCR.
3016) Specific antagomirs against the miRNA led to a clear increase in both ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels, and stimulated autophagic activity in cells.Since ATG4C and BECN1 function at two different steps of autophagic vesicle formation, targeting of both of these key autophagy proteins at once by the MIR376 family of miRNAs allows a robust decrease in the autophagic activity.
3017) In fact, BECN1 was subject to regulation by transcriptional upregulation, protein-protein interactions, phosphorylation and ubiquitination.[19], [20], [21] ATG4 was also reported to be regulated in various ways including transcriptional upregulation and reactive oxygen species [22] Moreover, miRNAs other than MIR376 family were shown to target BECN1 or ATG4 as well.
3018) Results presented here provide evidence that, the physiological function of these miRNAs is to control and limit the amplitude of autophagic activity which is strongly stimulated by starvation stress.
3019) A sequential accumulation of individual miRNAs might allow a sustained and a two-step control of the autophagic activity depending on the duration of stress.
3020) Since uncontrolled autophagic activity could be detrimental for cells, and under certain conditions lead to cell death [24] restriction of aberrant activation of autophagy by miRNAs under stressful conditions might prevent cellular demise and give cells a chance to recover a transient stress.Data presented here point out to the presence of distinct control mechanisms resulting in dissimilar MIR376A and MIR376B response kinetics.
3022) 10 or 15 GFP-LC3 dots per cell were considered as a threshold for the basal autophagic activity in MCF-7 and Huh7 cells, respectively.
3024) Results were expressed as firely luciferase activity normalized to renilla luciferase activity and analyzed as described previously.[10], [11]Antagomir testsmiRIDIAN® microRNA Hairpin Inhibitors (antagomirs) against hsa-miR-376a1 (IH-300683-05-0005) and a control antagomir (miRIDIAN microRNA Hairpin Inhibitor Negative Control (IN-001005-01-05)) were purchased from Dharmacon.
3026) Scherz-Shouval R, Shvets E, Fass E, Shorer H, Gil L, et al. (2007) Reactive oxygen species are essential for autophagy and specifically regulate the activity of Atg4.
3027) Wang T, Zhang X, Obijuru L, Laser J, Aris V, et al. (2007) A micro-RNA signature associated with race, tumor size, and target gene activity in human uterine leiomyomas.
3028) Oral O, Oz-Arslan D, Itah Z, Naghavi A, Deveci R, et al. (2012) Cleavage of Atg3 protein by caspase-8 regulates autophagy during receptor-activated cell death.
3029) Liu X, Sempere LF, Ouyang H, Memoli VA, Andrew AS, et al. (2010) MicroRNA-31 functions as an oncogenic microRNA in mouse and human lung cancer cells by repressing specific tumor suppressors.
3030) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
3031) Abnormalities of the autophagic activity may result in the accumulation of protein aggregates, organelle dysfunction, and autophagy disorders were associated with various diseases.
3033) Functional at a basal level for long-lived protein degradation and organelle turnover under normal conditions, autophagy is rapidly upregulated in response to both extracellular (e.g. nutrient starvation, hypoxia) and intracellular (e.g. accumulation of unfolded proteins, damaged organelles, pathogens) stress factors.[1] Concerted action of several protein complexes formed by at least 32 different autophagy (ATG) proteins result in the formation of double- or multi-membrane vesicles called autophagic vesicles or autophagosomes.[2] These vesicles enwrap cargo molecules and carry them to lysosomes for degradation, resulting in the recycling of their constituents for reuse by the cell.[3], [4]Protein complexes playing a role in autophagosome formation are numerous.
3035) Lipid conjugated LC3 is necessary for the elongation of autophagic membranes and completion of the vesicles.[7] Indeed, cells lacking one of the conjugation reaction components were shown to harbor autophagy defects.[8]Recent studies introduced microRNAs (miRNAs) as novel regulators of autophagy.[9], [10], [11] miRNAs are small non-coding RNAs serving as negative regulators of gene expression.[12] By base pairing with sequences found mainly in the 3′ untranslated region (3′UTR) of specific mRNAs, miRNAs lead to mRNA instability and/or translation inhibition resulting in a decrease in target gene expression.[13] A single miRNA may target tens to hundreds of mRNAs, hence may co-regulate and coordinate a number of cellular proteins and pathways at once.[14] So far, only a handful of miRNAs were shown to directly affect the autophagic activity.
3036) Overexpression of MIR376A attenuated starvation-induced autophagic activity and did so by modulating cellular ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels.
3037) Our findings underline the importance of miRNAs coded by the DLK1/GTL2 genomic region in physiological regulation and control of the autophagic activity.Go to:ResultsMIR376A overexpression blocked autophagyIn an unbiased screen, we discovered several miRNAs, including MIR376B and MIR181A as inhibitors of starvation-induced autophagy [10], [11] MIR376B is encoded from a gene region called, DLK1/GTL2 containing several miRNA genes (Figure 1A).
3038) To confirm these results with a complementary technique, we analyzed the effect of MIR376A overexpression on the conversion of endogenous free LC3 protein (LC3-I) to its lipidated and autophagic vesicle-associated form (LC3-II).
3039) Therefore MIR376A controlled ATG4C and BECN1 levels by directly affecting specific MRE sequences in the 3′UTR regions of these autophagy genes.Figure 6Figure 6MIR376A controlled miRNA-response elements (MREs) in ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA 3′ UTRs.Role of endogenous MIR376A in the control of starvation-induced autophagic activityTo further reveal the role of endogenous MIR376A in autophagy regulation, we transfected cells with control or MIR376A antagomirs, and analyzed conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation as markers of the autophagic activity.
3041) Specific antagomirs against the miRNA led to a clear increase in both ATG4C and BECN1 mRNA and protein levels, and stimulated autophagic activity in cells.Since ATG4C and BECN1 function at two different steps of autophagic vesicle formation, targeting of both of these key autophagy proteins at once by the MIR376 family of miRNAs allows a robust decrease in the autophagic activity.
3042) In fact, while BECN1 controls the production of PI3-P and regulates of autophagic vesicle nucleation sites, ATG4 is important for LC3 lipidation and in autophagic vesicle membrane elongation.
3043) Results presented here provide evidence that, the physiological function of these miRNAs is to control and limit the amplitude of autophagic activity which is strongly stimulated by starvation stress.
3044) A sequential accumulation of individual miRNAs might allow a sustained and a two-step control of the autophagic activity depending on the duration of stress.
3045) Since uncontrolled autophagic activity could be detrimental for cells, and under certain conditions lead to cell death [24] restriction of aberrant activation of autophagy by miRNAs under stressful conditions might prevent cellular demise and give cells a chance to recover a transient stress.Data presented here point out to the presence of distinct control mechanisms resulting in dissimilar MIR376A and MIR376B response kinetics.
3047) In the light of our data, here contribution of MIR376A to viral infection might not be limited to the attenuation of immune responses through MICB downregulation, but it might also involve blockage of antiviral autophagic degradation, autophagy-related antigen presentation on MHC molecules and perhaps autophagic cell death.
3048) [49], [50] MIR376A and possibly other autophagy-regulating miRNAs might be usurped by viruses to overcome the antiviral effects of autophagy.Altogether, our results underline the importance of MIR376A and MIR376B, and miRNAs in general, in the control of autophagic responses of cells and tissues.
3050) 10 or 15 GFP-LC3 dots per cell were considered as a threshold for the basal autophagic activity in MCF-7 and Huh7 cells, respectively.
3051) Recent studies have established a dual role for the transcription factor Pax6 as both an activator and repressor of gene expression in the eye, central nervous system, and pancreas.
3054) In this study, using wide-scale analysis of changes in gene expression following Pax6 deletion in the lens, we discover that Pax6 regulates the gene Trpm3 and its hosted microRNA, miR-204.
3055) Pax6 may also enhance gene expression by recruiting chromatin-remodeling enzymes and alleviating heterochromatin repression [4], [7], [8].
3057) In the post-natal mouse eye, its pattern resembles that of Pax6 (Figure 1;[21], [23]).Figure 1Figure 1Trpm3/miR-204 expression is dependent on Pax6 activity during eye development.The present study was aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanism of Pax6-dependent transcriptional repression through unbiased analysis of up-regulated genes in Pax6-mutant lenses.
3058) We show that inhibition of gene expression by Pax6 is at least partly mediated through direct activation of miR-204.
3059) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3061) This raised the possibility of Pax6's role in directly or indirectly repressing the expression of a large number of genes.To identify common targets of Pax6, we compared the list of altered genes in the lens and embryonic neocortex [25].
3062) Trpm3 is a melastatin-like cation channel which is sensitive to steroids, active in insulin-producing beta cells and a chemo- and thermosensor in the somatosensory system [20], [26], [27], while miR-204 has been documented to play a role in ocular lineages in fish and mammals [17], [18] and thus may mediate Pax6's inhibitory activity in the eye.Table 1Table 1Pax6 targets that are reduced in developing lens (E14.5) and forebrain (E12.5).Pax6 is required for Trpm3/miR-204 expression during lens developmentTrpm3 transcript distribution in the post-natal eye shows some overlap with Pax6 expression [18], [21], [22].
3063) Considering the possibility that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression directly during eye development, we compared the spatio-temporal expression patterns of Pax6 protein and Trpm3 mRNA during eye morphogenesis and differentiation (Figure 1).
3065) In contrast, from E10.5 onwards, Trpm3 mRNA was co-expressed with Pax6 protein in the lens and optic cup (OC) lineages.
3070) From that stage onwards, Trpm3 expression recapitulated the complex ocular pattern of Pax6 expression, suggesting that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression in the developing lens and OC derivatives.To determine whether Pax6 simultaneously regulates Trpm3 and its hosted non-coding miR-204, Pax6 systemic knockout (Pax6lacZ/lacZ, E11.5) and Pax6 lens-specific conditional mutants (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, E14.5) were examined (Figure 1).
3075) Therefore, we concluded that Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences located downstream of the second promoter of Trpm3.miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expressionSince miR-204 is down-regulated in ocular tissues depleted in Pax6, we next examined which downstream genes might be regulated by miR-204 in the developing mouse eye.
3076) Sox11 is a member of the SoxC group of TFs, which are required for neurogenesis in the embryo and adult [33]–[36].Table 2Table 2Putative miR-204 targets found to be upregulated in Pax6 CKO lenses.To examine whether miR-204 down-regulates Sox11 expression, we utilized mouse neuroblastoma 2a (Neu-2a) cells, which show high expression of Sox11 [37].
3077) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3078) Therefore, miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expression.
3079) This reveals the importance of this site for the regulation of Sox11, although the other sites may contribute as well.Pax6 negatively controls Sox11 expression in vivo in the lens and retinaSox11 has been shown to be required for ocular development in mice.
3081) Therefore, while both Pax6 and Sox11 are required for lens vesicle detachment and OC morphogenesis, Pax6 is not required for the expression of Sox11.In contrast, we identified a negative regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 at later stages of eye development as observed by the 2.3-fold elevation in Sox11 revealed by the microarray results above.
3086) Combined with the results above, these findings suggest that Pax6 modulates Sox11 via miR-204-based repression.Pax6 regulation of Trpm/miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved in vertebratesAs miR-204 was previously shown to be expressed and to regulate eye morphogenesis in medaka fish [17], we hypothesized that Pax6 regulation of medaka miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved.Interestingly, while ol-Trpm3 is not expressed in the medaka at stage 24 (st 24), the expression of ol-Trpm1 corresponded with the pattern of expression of murine Trpm3 and miR-204 (mm-Trpm3, Figure 1E and Figure 4A, 4C).
3087) The ol-Trpm1 was expressed in the LP, neuroretina, ciliary marginal zone, ciliary body and presumed RPE (Figure 4C, 4F), suggesting that both ol-Trpm3 and ol-Trpm1 may have undergone a process of divergent gene functionalization, a common evolutionary process in teleost species [40].
3091) Notably, no ectopic EGFP expression was observed in regions other than the retina, supporting tissue-specific Pax6-mediated activation of ol-Trpm1/miR-204 expression.
3093) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3094) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3095) Luciferase assay conducted on the Elavl3 3′ UTR further supported direct regulation of Elavl3 by miR-204, and antibody labeling revealed expansion of Elavl3 expression to the posterior lens cells of Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre mutants (Figure S8, [43]).Figure 5Figure 5miR-204 affects expression of multiple genes and mediates Pax6 suppression of gene expression.As the expression pattern and regulation of miR-204 seem to be conserved between fish and mammals ([17], Figure 4), we also expected conservation of miR-204 activity.
3098) Injection of mouse Pax6 mRNA into medaka embryos resulted in reduced expression of these three genes compared with control embryos injected with EGFP mRNA (ol-Sox11 was reduced to 45±5.1%, ol-Myo10 was reduced to 43±6.3%, and ol-Fbn2 to 56.4±2.1% Figure 5C).
3099) This reduction was significantly alleviated when embryos were co-injected with Mo-miR-204 (ol-Sox11 was rescued by 28.5±1%, ol-Myo10 by 26±3%, and ol-Fbn2 by 18.4±1.4%) (Figure 5C), indicating that at least part of the repression is mediated through miR-204 activity.Collectively, and similar to mammals, the expression of ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 is negatively regulated by Pax6 and ol-miR-204 in medaka fish.
3100) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3101) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3103) Furthermore, as miR-204 is expressed in several epithelial tissues that originate from the neuroectoderm, including the ciliary body, iris and choroid plexus, it is possible that miR-204 plays a more general role in maintenance of a non-neuronal fate of various epithelia within the CNS.Figure 6Figure 6Model of Pax6 genetic regulation of Sox11 during ocular development.miR-204 was found to negatively regulate the expression of ol-Meis2 in the eye of medaka fish [17].
3104) This regulatory loop may only be relevant at early stages of lens development, because in the mouse lens, Meis1 and Meis2 expression is lost before E12.5 [53], whereas Pax6 and miR-204 expression is maintained throughout development (Figure 1).
3105) Further analysis is required to substantiate the relevance of the miR-204–Meis1/2–Pax6 feedback loop in maintaining correct Pax6 dosage during early stages of lens development.Pax6 regulation of neuronal SOX genesA previous global analysis of gene expression revealed a significant number of neuron-specific genes that are up-regulated in Pax6-heterozygous lenses [31].
3113) In cells that express miR-204, the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6 becomes inhibitory, contributing to loss of Sox11 expression from the lens fibers (Figure 3 and Figure 6).
3115) We therefore considered the possibility that Pax6 might negatively regulate Sox11 transcription directly, in addition to repressing expression through miR-204.
3116) Nevertheless, it is possible that binding sites, other than those tested here, play a role in the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6, and that Pax6 represses Sox11 in the presence of co-factors which are only available in the restricted developmental context of the embryonic lens in vivo.In the retina, Sox11 exhibits a dynamic pattern of expression.
3118) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed in Table S1.MiRNA–target enrichment analysisWe calculated the significance of miR-204-target enrichment among the up-regulated genes (fold change >1.5, P-value<0.05, n = 754 genes) using TargetScan Mouse predictions (version 5.2; http://www.targetscan.org/mmu_50/) and the hypergeometric test.
3120) The parameters were: 95°C/10 min followed by 45 cycles of 94°C/10 s, 60°C/20 s and 72°C/30 s.Immunofluorescence quantification of protein levelsFor Sox11 repression by miR-204, Neuro-2a cells (ATCC) were grown on coverslips in 24-well plates for 24 h and then co-transfected with 500 ng of pCAG-GFP expression plasmid and either 500 ng of scrambled-miRVec or miR-204-miRVec expression plasmid containing the pre-miRNA of miR-204 [75].
3121) Cells were co-transfected with the construct (100 ng), expression vector pcDNA3/Pax6 (100 ng) and RL-TK plasmid with Renilla luciferase (10 ng) as a transfection-efficiency control.
3122) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4 and sequences of for functional studies of miR204 are listed in Table S5.qRT–PCR analysis of gene expression in injected embryosAt least 250 embryos were pooled in each assay.
3123) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Volcano plot demonstrating differences in gene expression between Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-cre and control E14.5 lens.
3129) Sox11 expression detected by in-situ hybridization in control (A,B) and Pax6lacZ/lacZ (C,D) mutant eye on E9.5 (A,C) and E11.5 (B,D).
3131) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(66K, docx)Table S2List of oligonucleotide probes used for ChIP and EMSA.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(15K, docx)Table S3Selection of putative Pax6 binding sites.
3133) Grishok A, Pasquinelli AE, Conte D, Li N, Parrish S, et al. (2001) Genes and mechanisms related to RNA interference regulate expression of the small temporal RNAs that control C. elegans developmental timing.
3134) Adijanto J, Castorino JJ, Wang ZX, Maminishkis A, Grunwald GB, et al. (2012) Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) promotes differentiation of human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) by regulating microRNA-204/211 expression.
3139) Gennarino VA, Sardiello M, Avellino R, Meola N, Maselli V, et al. (2009) MicroRNA target prediction by expression analysis of host genes.
3140) Analysis of genes altered in mouse Pax6 mutants during lens development revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 targets among the genes up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens.
3144) Lastly, by conducting parallel experiments in the medaka fish, we show that Pax6 control of miR-204 and its target genes is evolutionarily conserved between mammals and fish, stressing the biological importance of this pathway.
3145) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3148) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3149) This raised the possibility of Pax6's role in directly or indirectly repressing the expression of a large number of genes.To identify common targets of Pax6, we compared the list of altered genes in the lens and embryonic neocortex [25].
3150) The four genes that were down-regulated in both lens and neuronal lineages are potential direct transcriptional targets of Pax6.
3151) Trpm3 is a melastatin-like cation channel which is sensitive to steroids, active in insulin-producing beta cells and a chemo- and thermosensor in the somatosensory system [20], [26], [27], while miR-204 has been documented to play a role in ocular lineages in fish and mammals [17], [18] and thus may mediate Pax6's inhibitory activity in the eye.Table 1Table 1Pax6 targets that are reduced in developing lens (E14.5) and forebrain (E12.5).Pax6 is required for Trpm3/miR-204 expression during lens developmentTrpm3 transcript distribution in the post-natal eye shows some overlap with Pax6 expression [18], [21], [22].
3152) Two amplicons: A1 (chr19:22,524,578–697) and A2 (chr19:22,525,042–126) within the candidate regulatory region were enriched 16.3-fold (P = 0.0043) and 25.9-fold (P = 0.0098), respectively, compared to an upstream non-specific region (NSR-chr19:NSR-chr19:22,523,967–4079).Figure 2Figure 2Pax6 directly binds a Trpm3 enhancer sequence in vitro and in vivo.We tested four sequences (Trpm3.1–4) containing putative Pax6 binding sites using EMSA (prediction of target sites was performed as described in [30], EMSA described in [31], and the sequence similarities of Trpm3.1–Trpm3.4 to Pax6 binding matrices are presented in Table S2, Table S3).
3153) Since most miRNA target sites can be found in the 3′ UTR segment of the target genes, we searched for putative miR-204 binding sites in the 3′ UTRs of all mouse genes (TargetScan Mouse, www.targetscan.org).
3154) Statistical analysis revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 target genes among the genes negatively regulated by Pax6 (hypergeometric test, P = 0.019), making them good candidates for miR-204-mediated repression in the developing lens.
3156) Sox11 is a member of the SoxC group of TFs, which are required for neurogenesis in the embryo and adult [33]–[36].Table 2Table 2Putative miR-204 targets found to be upregulated in Pax6 CKO lenses.To examine whether miR-204 down-regulates Sox11 expression, we utilized mouse neuroblastoma 2a (Neu-2a) cells, which show high expression of Sox11 [37].
3157) In contrast, when we used a mutated version of the site that had the highest probability of conserved targeting (based on TargetScan version 6.2, position 914–921 on the 3′ UTR), luciferase levels were restored to control levels (96%, P = 0.20, Figure 3D arrow).
3159) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3163) With this in mind, it is possible that part of Pax6's activity in inhibiting cataract formation is mediated by the activity of miR-204 in the lens and that restoration of miR-204 levels may prevent anterior subcapsular cataract formation.In addition, the novel miR-204 targets in lens development uncovered here include genes involved in cell motility Myo10 [48], cell matrix and regulation of the TGFβ pathway Fbn2 [49], and genes that function in neuronal or glia cells Sox11 [37], Elavl3 [43], Cpne8 [50] and Nfia [51].
3164) The identification of multiple genes responding to miR-204, and the finding that some of these targets are conserved among vertebrates (Sox11, Fbn2, Myo10), suggest a major effect of miR-204 in regulating LE fate and cell behavior.
3166) Hence, this study reveals a new level of regulatory hierarchy mediated by Pax6 during the acquisition of cell fate.Combinatorial interactions between miRNAs and TFs have been suggested based on in-silico strategies which identified a prevalent TF-miRNA feed-forward loop in which miRNA and TFs co-regulate target genes, as well as each other [65], [66].
3167) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed in Table S1.MiRNA–target enrichment analysisWe calculated the significance of miR-204-target enrichment among the up-regulated genes (fold change >1.5, P-value<0.05, n = 754 genes) using TargetScan Mouse predictions (version 5.2; http://www.targetscan.org/mmu_50/) and the hypergeometric test.
3168) Lewis BP, Burge CB, Bartel DP (2005) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
3172) Gennarino VA, Sardiello M, Avellino R, Meola N, Maselli V, et al. (2009) MicroRNA target prediction by expression analysis of host genes.
3173) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
3175) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3176) Recent studies have established a dual role for the transcription factor Pax6 as both an activator and repressor of gene expression in the eye, central nervous system, and pancreas.
3179) Analysis of genes altered in mouse Pax6 mutants during lens development revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 targets among the genes up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens.
3180) Collectively, this study identifies a novel evolutionarily conserved mechanism by which Pax6 controls the down-regulation of multiple genes through direct up-regulation of miR-204.Go to:Author SummaryThe transcription factor Pax6 is reiteratively employed in space and time for the establishment of progenitor pools and the differentiation of neuronal and non-neuronal lineages of the CNS, pancreas, and eye.
3181) Execution of these diverse developmental programs depends on simultaneous activation and repression of gene networks functioning downstream of Pax6.
3184) In this study, using wide-scale analysis of changes in gene expression following Pax6 deletion in the lens, we discover that Pax6 regulates the gene Trpm3 and its hosted microRNA, miR-204.
3186) Lastly, by conducting parallel experiments in the medaka fish, we show that Pax6 control of miR-204 and its target genes is evolutionarily conserved between mammals and fish, stressing the biological importance of this pathway.
3187) Pax6 regulation of miR-204 explains part of the complex, divergent inhibitory activity of Pax6 in ocular progenitor cells, which is required to establish and maintain the identity and function of ocular tissues.Go to:IntroductionLineage-specific transcription factors (TFs) such as Pax6 direct the development of multiple tissues through the regulation of gene networks that execute discrete developmental programs.
3188) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3189) Pax6 may also enhance gene expression by recruiting chromatin-remodeling enzymes and alleviating heterochromatin repression [4], [7], [8].
3193) Therefore, regulation of a miRNA gene by a tissue-specific TF can facilitate the down-regulation of batteries of genes.To ascertain the roles of miRNAs in eye development, somatic mutations of the miRNA-maturation enzyme gene Dicer1 were examined in the mouse lens and retinal progenitors cells (RPCs, [14]–[16]).
3195) In the post-natal mouse eye, its pattern resembles that of Pax6 (Figure 1;[21], [23]).Figure 1Figure 1Trpm3/miR-204 expression is dependent on Pax6 activity during eye development.The present study was aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanism of Pax6-dependent transcriptional repression through unbiased analysis of up-regulated genes in Pax6-mutant lenses.
3196) We show that inhibition of gene expression by Pax6 is at least partly mediated through direct activation of miR-204.
3197) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3201) This raised the possibility of Pax6's role in directly or indirectly repressing the expression of a large number of genes.To identify common targets of Pax6, we compared the list of altered genes in the lens and embryonic neocortex [25].
3203) The four genes that were down-regulated in both lens and neuronal lineages are potential direct transcriptional targets of Pax6.
3204) Considering the possibility that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression directly during eye development, we compared the spatio-temporal expression patterns of Pax6 protein and Trpm3 mRNA during eye morphogenesis and differentiation (Figure 1).
3205) These findings strongly support genetic regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 by Pax6 in several ocular tissue types.Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences in vitro and in vivoTo determine whether Pax6 regulation of the Trpm3/miR-204 gene is direct, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify the binding region, in conjunction with in-silico TF binding site searches, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to precisely locate Pax6 binding sites.
3207) Therefore, we concluded that Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences located downstream of the second promoter of Trpm3.miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expressionSince miR-204 is down-regulated in ocular tissues depleted in Pax6, we next examined which downstream genes might be regulated by miR-204 in the developing mouse eye.
3208) Since most miRNA target sites can be found in the 3′ UTR segment of the target genes, we searched for putative miR-204 binding sites in the 3′ UTRs of all mouse genes (TargetScan Mouse, www.targetscan.org).
3209) From the list of genes containing conserved putative binding sites for miR-204, 35 were found to be up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens with at least a 1.5-fold change (Table 2).
3210) Statistical analysis revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 target genes among the genes negatively regulated by Pax6 (hypergeometric test, P = 0.019), making them good candidates for miR-204-mediated repression in the developing lens.
3212) Sox11 is a member of the SoxC group of TFs, which are required for neurogenesis in the embryo and adult [33]–[36].Table 2Table 2Putative miR-204 targets found to be upregulated in Pax6 CKO lenses.To examine whether miR-204 down-regulates Sox11 expression, we utilized mouse neuroblastoma 2a (Neu-2a) cells, which show high expression of Sox11 [37].
3213) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3214) Several miRNA binding sites on the gene's 3′ UTR usually exhibit additive effects ([38]).
3215) Therefore, while both Pax6 and Sox11 are required for lens vesicle detachment and OC morphogenesis, Pax6 is not required for the expression of Sox11.In contrast, we identified a negative regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 at later stages of eye development as observed by the 2.3-fold elevation in Sox11 revealed by the microarray results above.
3216) This up-regulation of the lacZ reporter may be due to loss of miR-204 binding sites within the 3′ UTR, which were replaced with the lacZ gene, or to persistence of β-galactosidase protein in the slow-metabolizing lens fibers.
3217) Combined with the results above, these findings suggest that Pax6 modulates Sox11 via miR-204-based repression.Pax6 regulation of Trpm/miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved in vertebratesAs miR-204 was previously shown to be expressed and to regulate eye morphogenesis in medaka fish [17], we hypothesized that Pax6 regulation of medaka miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved.Interestingly, while ol-Trpm3 is not expressed in the medaka at stage 24 (st 24), the expression of ol-Trpm1 corresponded with the pattern of expression of murine Trpm3 and miR-204 (mm-Trpm3, Figure 1E and Figure 4A, 4C).
3218) The ol-Trpm1 was expressed in the LP, neuroretina, ciliary marginal zone, ciliary body and presumed RPE (Figure 4C, 4F), suggesting that both ol-Trpm3 and ol-Trpm1 may have undergone a process of divergent gene functionalization, a common evolutionary process in teleost species [40].
3221) Furthermore, comparison of the protein sequences together with phylogenetic analysis of many known vertebrate Trpm1 and Trpm3 proteins (human, caw, mouse, rat, chicken, Xenopus, zebrafish, Table S6) using PHYLIP package tools [41] identified ol-Trpm1 as more closely related to the mammalian Trpm3 than to mammalian Trpm1 (Figure S6).
3222) Utilizing phylogenetic footprinting in sequences from related species [42], we identified putative Pax6 cis-regulatory elements within the first 1.5 kb upstream of the ol-Trpm1 coding region (Figure 4E).
3224) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3225) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3226) From the eight genes that were tested, including Sox11, six were down-regulated in response to hsa-miR-204 mimic; the five reduced in H36CE cells were also significantly elevated following transfection with hsa-miR-204 inhibitor (Cpn8, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, Sox11; Figure 5A).
3227) Luciferase assay conducted on the Elavl3 3′ UTR further supported direct regulation of Elavl3 by miR-204, and antibody labeling revealed expansion of Elavl3 expression to the posterior lens cells of Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre mutants (Figure S8, [43]).Figure 5Figure 5miR-204 affects expression of multiple genes and mediates Pax6 suppression of gene expression.As the expression pattern and regulation of miR-204 seem to be conserved between fish and mammals ([17], Figure 4), we also expected conservation of miR-204 activity.
3228) ol-Meis2, ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 transcripts were significantly reduced following treatment with hsa-miR-204 mimic, by 28±3.7%, 23±2.8%, 43±3,4% and 21±1% relative to the control, respectively (Figure 5B); these genes were up-regulated following treatment with the Mo-miR-204 by 26.5±4.9%, 38.5±7.8%, 21±4% and 29.4±1.1%, respectively, relative to the control (Figure 5B).
3229) Injection of mouse Pax6 mRNA into medaka embryos resulted in reduced expression of these three genes compared with control embryos injected with EGFP mRNA (ol-Sox11 was reduced to 45±5.1%, ol-Myo10 was reduced to 43±6.3%, and ol-Fbn2 to 56.4±2.1% Figure 5C).
3230) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3233) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3235) With this in mind, it is possible that part of Pax6's activity in inhibiting cataract formation is mediated by the activity of miR-204 in the lens and that restoration of miR-204 levels may prevent anterior subcapsular cataract formation.In addition, the novel miR-204 targets in lens development uncovered here include genes involved in cell motility Myo10 [48], cell matrix and regulation of the TGFβ pathway Fbn2 [49], and genes that function in neuronal or glia cells Sox11 [37], Elavl3 [43], Cpne8 [50] and Nfia [51].
3236) The identification of multiple genes responding to miR-204, and the finding that some of these targets are conserved among vertebrates (Sox11, Fbn2, Myo10), suggest a major effect of miR-204 in regulating LE fate and cell behavior.
3237) Furthermore, as miR-204 is expressed in several epithelial tissues that originate from the neuroectoderm, including the ciliary body, iris and choroid plexus, it is possible that miR-204 plays a more general role in maintenance of a non-neuronal fate of various epithelia within the CNS.Figure 6Figure 6Model of Pax6 genetic regulation of Sox11 during ocular development.miR-204 was found to negatively regulate the expression of ol-Meis2 in the eye of medaka fish [17].
3238) Further analysis is required to substantiate the relevance of the miR-204–Meis1/2–Pax6 feedback loop in maintaining correct Pax6 dosage during early stages of lens development.Pax6 regulation of neuronal SOX genesA previous global analysis of gene expression revealed a significant number of neuron-specific genes that are up-regulated in Pax6-heterozygous lenses [31].
3242) The propensity for Pax6 to repress SOX genes in the lens could be a way of silencing competing genetic programs.In this paper, we focused on the regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 to determine the mechanism underlying Pax6 inhibitory activity during organ formation.
3244) Hence, this study reveals a new level of regulatory hierarchy mediated by Pax6 during the acquisition of cell fate.Combinatorial interactions between miRNAs and TFs have been suggested based on in-silico strategies which identified a prevalent TF-miRNA feed-forward loop in which miRNA and TFs co-regulate target genes, as well as each other [65], [66].
3247) Therefore, Pax6 regulation of Sox11 during retinogenesis is expected to be part of a larger regulatory network, and may be repressed by miR-204 in only a subset of RPCs.In conclusion, this study reveals novel involvement of miRNA-based gene repression during lens and retinal development.
3248) Pax6, a regulator of multiple processes during eye development, is shown to execute part of its gene regulation through direct activation of miR-204.Go to:Materials and MethodsMouse linesThe mouse lines employed in this study have been previously described: Pax6loxP [67], Mlr10-cre [68], αCre [29], Pax6lacz [69].
3250) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed in Table S1.MiRNA–target enrichment analysisWe calculated the significance of miR-204-target enrichment among the up-regulated genes (fold change >1.5, P-value<0.05, n = 754 genes) using TargetScan Mouse predictions (version 5.2; http://www.targetscan.org/mmu_50/) and the hypergeometric test.
3253) A 1.5-kb region of ol-Trpm1 genomic sequence containing the start codon using the primers: ol-Trpm1 forward 5′-TGTATCATGAGCCGCTAATG-3′ and ol-Trpm1 reverse 5′-GCAGCACCAGGAGAAGGCTC-3′, was cloned in frame with an EGFP reporter gene into the pSKII-ISceI-EGFP and pGL3 basic vectors [76] to create the Trpm1P:GFP and Trpm1:Luc constructs.Phylogenetic analysisSequence alignments were performed using the VISTA [77] and Multalign programs [78], which are available at the corresponding websites: [http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml and [http://bioinfo.genopole-toulouse.prd.fr/multalin/multalin.html].
3256) Three independent stable transgenic lines were generated for the tested construct.mRNA injection of medaka embryosIn-vitro synthesis of mouse Pax6 mRNA (cDNA from [80]) was performed as described previously [76].
3260) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4 and sequences of for functional studies of miR204 are listed in Table S5.qRT–PCR analysis of gene expression in injected embryosAt least 250 embryos were pooled in each assay.
3261) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Volcano plot demonstrating differences in gene expression between Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-cre and control E14.5 lens.
3263) Sox9 detected with antibodies (green) in the Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre (B) but not control Pax6loxP/loxP (A) lens on E14.5.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(3.8M, tif)Figure S6Phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes.
3268) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(66K, docx)Table S2List of oligonucleotide probes used for ChIP and EMSA.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(15K, docx)Table S3Selection of putative Pax6 binding sites.
3269) The patterns and number of mismatch that were identified for each of the putative binding sequences are presented.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(17K, docx)Table S4Primers used for detection of transcript levels of specific genes using q-PCR.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(16K, docx)Table S5Sequences employed for functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture and in fish embryos.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(14K, docx)Table S6The protein sequences of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 orthologues from various species for phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes (Figure S6).(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(33K, docx)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to Michael L.
3275) Yang Y, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Cvekl A (2004) Transcriptional regulation of mouse alphaB- and gammaF-crystallin genes in lens: opposite promoter-specific interactions between Pax6 and large Maf transcription factors.
3276) Lewis BP, Burge CB, Bartel DP (2005) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
3287) Neurogenetics 11: 185–191 [PMC free article] [PubMed]51.
3289) Zhang X, Friedman A, Heaney S, Purcell P, Maas RL (2002) Meis homeoproteins directly regulate Pax6 during vertebrate lens morphogenesis.
3292) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
3294) Gennarino VA, Sardiello M, Avellino R, Meola N, Maselli V, et al. (2009) MicroRNA target prediction by expression analysis of host genes.
3295) These findings strongly support genetic regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 by Pax6 in several ocular tissue types.Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences in vitro and in vivoTo determine whether Pax6 regulation of the Trpm3/miR-204 gene is direct, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify the binding region, in conjunction with in-silico TF binding site searches, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to precisely locate Pax6 binding sites.
3297) Two amplicons: A1 (chr19:22,524,578–697) and A2 (chr19:22,525,042–126) within the candidate regulatory region were enriched 16.3-fold (P = 0.0043) and 25.9-fold (P = 0.0098), respectively, compared to an upstream non-specific region (NSR-chr19:NSR-chr19:22,523,967–4079).Figure 2Figure 2Pax6 directly binds a Trpm3 enhancer sequence in vitro and in vivo.We tested four sequences (Trpm3.1–4) containing putative Pax6 binding sites using EMSA (prediction of target sites was performed as described in [30], EMSA described in [31], and the sequence similarities of Trpm3.1–Trpm3.4 to Pax6 binding matrices are presented in Table S2, Table S3).
3298) Since most miRNA target sites can be found in the 3′ UTR segment of the target genes, we searched for putative miR-204 binding sites in the 3′ UTRs of all mouse genes (TargetScan Mouse, www.targetscan.org).
3299) From the list of genes containing conserved putative binding sites for miR-204, 35 were found to be up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens with at least a 1.5-fold change (Table 2).
3300) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3301) In contrast, when we used a mutated version of the site that had the highest probability of conserved targeting (based on TargetScan version 6.2, position 914–921 on the 3′ UTR), luciferase levels were restored to control levels (96%, P = 0.20, Figure 3D arrow).
3302) Several miRNA binding sites on the gene's 3′ UTR usually exhibit additive effects ([38]).
3304) This reveals the importance of this site for the regulation of Sox11, although the other sites may contribute as well.Pax6 negatively controls Sox11 expression in vivo in the lens and retinaSox11 has been shown to be required for ocular development in mice.
3305) This up-regulation of the lacZ reporter may be due to loss of miR-204 binding sites within the 3′ UTR, which were replaced with the lacZ gene, or to persistence of β-galactosidase protein in the slow-metabolizing lens fibers.
3307) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3308) Nevertheless, it is possible that binding sites, other than those tested here, play a role in the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6, and that Pax6 represses Sox11 in the presence of co-factors which are only available in the restricted developmental context of the embryonic lens in vivo.In the retina, Sox11 exhibits a dynamic pattern of expression.
3310) A 1.5-kb region of ol-Trpm1 genomic sequence containing the start codon using the primers: ol-Trpm1 forward 5′-TGTATCATGAGCCGCTAATG-3′ and ol-Trpm1 reverse 5′-GCAGCACCAGGAGAAGGCTC-3′, was cloned in frame with an EGFP reporter gene into the pSKII-ISceI-EGFP and pGL3 basic vectors [76] to create the Trpm1P:GFP and Trpm1:Luc constructs.Phylogenetic analysisSequence alignments were performed using the VISTA [77] and Multalign programs [78], which are available at the corresponding websites: [http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml and [http://bioinfo.genopole-toulouse.prd.fr/multalin/multalin.html].
3311) Control embryos were injected with 15 ng/µl of EGFP mRNA [76].Cell transfection and luciferase assaysFor miRNA-repression studies (Figure 3D), a 506-bp fragment of the Sox11 3′ UTR (spanning two miR-204 binding sites) or 484 bp of Elavl3's 3′ UTR was amplified by PCR from mouse brain cDNA and XhoI–NotI restriction sites were added with the following primers: Sox11 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCTGTTACTCTAGGGAGTTGA-3′ and (R) 5′-AAGGTCAAGCGGCCGCAAAGGGAAGAAGTGCCTGAA-3; Elavl3 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCAATGGTGCCCTACTCAGG-3′ and (R) 5′-AGGTCAAGCGGCCGCTTCCTGTGGCCATGTTTGCT-3′.The 3′ UTRs were cloned downstream of the Renilla luciferase reporter (psiCHECK™-2, Promega).
3312) For site-directed mutation, the miR-204 binding site on the 3′ UTRs (second binding site for Sox11), was mutated by PCR with PfuUltra II Fusion HS DNA Polymerase (Genex).
3313) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(66K, docx)Table S2List of oligonucleotide probes used for ChIP and EMSA.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(15K, docx)Table S3Selection of putative Pax6 binding sites.
3315) The putative Pax6 binding motifs were selected based on the sites identified using SELEX assay (Xie and Cvekl 2011, Epstein et al., 1994).
3317) Yang Y, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Cvekl A (2004) Transcriptional regulation of mouse alphaB- and gammaF-crystallin genes in lens: opposite promoter-specific interactions between Pax6 and large Maf transcription factors.
3319) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3321) Analysis of genes altered in mouse Pax6 mutants during lens development revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 targets among the genes up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens.
3323) Collectively, this study identifies a novel evolutionarily conserved mechanism by which Pax6 controls the down-regulation of multiple genes through direct up-regulation of miR-204.Go to:Author SummaryThe transcription factor Pax6 is reiteratively employed in space and time for the establishment of progenitor pools and the differentiation of neuronal and non-neuronal lineages of the CNS, pancreas, and eye.
3324) In this study, using wide-scale analysis of changes in gene expression following Pax6 deletion in the lens, we discover that Pax6 regulates the gene Trpm3 and its hosted microRNA, miR-204.
3325) Pax6 regulation of miR-204 explains part of the complex, divergent inhibitory activity of Pax6 in ocular progenitor cells, which is required to establish and maintain the identity and function of ocular tissues.Go to:IntroductionLineage-specific transcription factors (TFs) such as Pax6 direct the development of multiple tissues through the regulation of gene networks that execute discrete developmental programs.
3326) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3327) Therefore, regulation of a miRNA gene by a tissue-specific TF can facilitate the down-regulation of batteries of genes.To ascertain the roles of miRNAs in eye development, somatic mutations of the miRNA-maturation enzyme gene Dicer1 were examined in the mouse lens and retinal progenitors cells (RPCs, [14]–[16]).
3329) In the post-natal mouse eye, its pattern resembles that of Pax6 (Figure 1;[21], [23]).Figure 1Figure 1Trpm3/miR-204 expression is dependent on Pax6 activity during eye development.The present study was aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanism of Pax6-dependent transcriptional repression through unbiased analysis of up-regulated genes in Pax6-mutant lenses.
3333) The four genes that were down-regulated in both lens and neuronal lineages are potential direct transcriptional targets of Pax6.
3334) Considering the possibility that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression directly during eye development, we compared the spatio-temporal expression patterns of Pax6 protein and Trpm3 mRNA during eye morphogenesis and differentiation (Figure 1).
3335) From that stage onwards, Trpm3 expression recapitulated the complex ocular pattern of Pax6 expression, suggesting that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression in the developing lens and OC derivatives.To determine whether Pax6 simultaneously regulates Trpm3 and its hosted non-coding miR-204, Pax6 systemic knockout (Pax6lacZ/lacZ, E11.5) and Pax6 lens-specific conditional mutants (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, E14.5) were examined (Figure 1).
3336) These findings strongly support genetic regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 by Pax6 in several ocular tissue types.Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences in vitro and in vivoTo determine whether Pax6 regulation of the Trpm3/miR-204 gene is direct, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify the binding region, in conjunction with in-silico TF binding site searches, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to precisely locate Pax6 binding sites.
3338) Two amplicons: A1 (chr19:22,524,578–697) and A2 (chr19:22,525,042–126) within the candidate regulatory region were enriched 16.3-fold (P = 0.0043) and 25.9-fold (P = 0.0098), respectively, compared to an upstream non-specific region (NSR-chr19:NSR-chr19:22,523,967–4079).Figure 2Figure 2Pax6 directly binds a Trpm3 enhancer sequence in vitro and in vivo.We tested four sequences (Trpm3.1–4) containing putative Pax6 binding sites using EMSA (prediction of target sites was performed as described in [30], EMSA described in [31], and the sequence similarities of Trpm3.1–Trpm3.4 to Pax6 binding matrices are presented in Table S2, Table S3).
3339) Therefore, we concluded that Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences located downstream of the second promoter of Trpm3.miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expressionSince miR-204 is down-regulated in ocular tissues depleted in Pax6, we next examined which downstream genes might be regulated by miR-204 in the developing mouse eye.
3340) From the list of genes containing conserved putative binding sites for miR-204, 35 were found to be up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens with at least a 1.5-fold change (Table 2).
3341) Statistical analysis revealed significant over-representation of miR-204 target genes among the genes negatively regulated by Pax6 (hypergeometric test, P = 0.019), making them good candidates for miR-204-mediated repression in the developing lens.
3342) Sox11 is a member of the SoxC group of TFs, which are required for neurogenesis in the embryo and adult [33]–[36].Table 2Table 2Putative miR-204 targets found to be upregulated in Pax6 CKO lenses.To examine whether miR-204 down-regulates Sox11 expression, we utilized mouse neuroblastoma 2a (Neu-2a) cells, which show high expression of Sox11 [37].
3343) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3344) Therefore, miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expression.
3345) This reveals the importance of this site for the regulation of Sox11, although the other sites may contribute as well.Pax6 negatively controls Sox11 expression in vivo in the lens and retinaSox11 has been shown to be required for ocular development in mice.
3346) Therefore, while both Pax6 and Sox11 are required for lens vesicle detachment and OC morphogenesis, Pax6 is not required for the expression of Sox11.In contrast, we identified a negative regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 at later stages of eye development as observed by the 2.3-fold elevation in Sox11 revealed by the microarray results above.
3347) This up-regulation of the lacZ reporter may be due to loss of miR-204 binding sites within the 3′ UTR, which were replaced with the lacZ gene, or to persistence of β-galactosidase protein in the slow-metabolizing lens fibers.
3350) Combined with the results above, these findings suggest that Pax6 modulates Sox11 via miR-204-based repression.Pax6 regulation of Trpm/miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved in vertebratesAs miR-204 was previously shown to be expressed and to regulate eye morphogenesis in medaka fish [17], we hypothesized that Pax6 regulation of medaka miR-204 is evolutionarily conserved.Interestingly, while ol-Trpm3 is not expressed in the medaka at stage 24 (st 24), the expression of ol-Trpm1 corresponded with the pattern of expression of murine Trpm3 and miR-204 (mm-Trpm3, Figure 1E and Figure 4A, 4C).
3352) Utilizing phylogenetic footprinting in sequences from related species [42], we identified putative Pax6 cis-regulatory elements within the first 1.5 kb upstream of the ol-Trpm1 coding region (Figure 4E).
3354) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3355) From the eight genes that were tested, including Sox11, six were down-regulated in response to hsa-miR-204 mimic; the five reduced in H36CE cells were also significantly elevated following transfection with hsa-miR-204 inhibitor (Cpn8, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, Sox11; Figure 5A).
3356) Luciferase assay conducted on the Elavl3 3′ UTR further supported direct regulation of Elavl3 by miR-204, and antibody labeling revealed expansion of Elavl3 expression to the posterior lens cells of Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre mutants (Figure S8, [43]).Figure 5Figure 5miR-204 affects expression of multiple genes and mediates Pax6 suppression of gene expression.As the expression pattern and regulation of miR-204 seem to be conserved between fish and mammals ([17], Figure 4), we also expected conservation of miR-204 activity.
3357) ol-Meis2, ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 transcripts were significantly reduced following treatment with hsa-miR-204 mimic, by 28±3.7%, 23±2.8%, 43±3,4% and 21±1% relative to the control, respectively (Figure 5B); these genes were up-regulated following treatment with the Mo-miR-204 by 26.5±4.9%, 38.5±7.8%, 21±4% and 29.4±1.1%, respectively, relative to the control (Figure 5B).
3359) This reduction was significantly alleviated when embryos were co-injected with Mo-miR-204 (ol-Sox11 was rescued by 28.5±1%, ol-Myo10 by 26±3%, and ol-Fbn2 by 18.4±1.4%) (Figure 5C), indicating that at least part of the repression is mediated through miR-204 activity.Collectively, and similar to mammals, the expression of ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 is negatively regulated by Pax6 and ol-miR-204 in medaka fish.
3360) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3365) With this in mind, it is possible that part of Pax6's activity in inhibiting cataract formation is mediated by the activity of miR-204 in the lens and that restoration of miR-204 levels may prevent anterior subcapsular cataract formation.In addition, the novel miR-204 targets in lens development uncovered here include genes involved in cell motility Myo10 [48], cell matrix and regulation of the TGFβ pathway Fbn2 [49], and genes that function in neuronal or glia cells Sox11 [37], Elavl3 [43], Cpne8 [50] and Nfia [51].
3366) The identification of multiple genes responding to miR-204, and the finding that some of these targets are conserved among vertebrates (Sox11, Fbn2, Myo10), suggest a major effect of miR-204 in regulating LE fate and cell behavior.
3367) Furthermore, as miR-204 is expressed in several epithelial tissues that originate from the neuroectoderm, including the ciliary body, iris and choroid plexus, it is possible that miR-204 plays a more general role in maintenance of a non-neuronal fate of various epithelia within the CNS.Figure 6Figure 6Model of Pax6 genetic regulation of Sox11 during ocular development.miR-204 was found to negatively regulate the expression of ol-Meis2 in the eye of medaka fish [17].
3370) This regulatory loop may only be relevant at early stages of lens development, because in the mouse lens, Meis1 and Meis2 expression is lost before E12.5 [53], whereas Pax6 and miR-204 expression is maintained throughout development (Figure 1).
3371) Further analysis is required to substantiate the relevance of the miR-204–Meis1/2–Pax6 feedback loop in maintaining correct Pax6 dosage during early stages of lens development.Pax6 regulation of neuronal SOX genesA previous global analysis of gene expression revealed a significant number of neuron-specific genes that are up-regulated in Pax6-heterozygous lenses [31].
3374) The propensity for Pax6 to repress SOX genes in the lens could be a way of silencing competing genetic programs.In this paper, we focused on the regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 to determine the mechanism underlying Pax6 inhibitory activity during organ formation.
3377) In cells that express miR-204, the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6 becomes inhibitory, contributing to loss of Sox11 expression from the lens fibers (Figure 3 and Figure 6).
3378) Hence, this study reveals a new level of regulatory hierarchy mediated by Pax6 during the acquisition of cell fate.Combinatorial interactions between miRNAs and TFs have been suggested based on in-silico strategies which identified a prevalent TF-miRNA feed-forward loop in which miRNA and TFs co-regulate target genes, as well as each other [65], [66].
3379) We therefore considered the possibility that Pax6 might negatively regulate Sox11 transcription directly, in addition to repressing expression through miR-204.
3381) Nevertheless, it is possible that binding sites, other than those tested here, play a role in the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6, and that Pax6 represses Sox11 in the presence of co-factors which are only available in the restricted developmental context of the embryonic lens in vivo.In the retina, Sox11 exhibits a dynamic pattern of expression.
3384) Therefore, Pax6 regulation of Sox11 during retinogenesis is expected to be part of a larger regulatory network, and may be repressed by miR-204 in only a subset of RPCs.In conclusion, this study reveals novel involvement of miRNA-based gene repression during lens and retinal development.
3385) Pax6, a regulator of multiple processes during eye development, is shown to execute part of its gene regulation through direct activation of miR-204.Go to:Materials and MethodsMouse linesThe mouse lines employed in this study have been previously described: Pax6loxP [67], Mlr10-cre [68], αCre [29], Pax6lacz [69].
3386) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed in Table S1.MiRNA–target enrichment analysisWe calculated the significance of miR-204-target enrichment among the up-regulated genes (fold change >1.5, P-value<0.05, n = 754 genes) using TargetScan Mouse predictions (version 5.2; http://www.targetscan.org/mmu_50/) and the hypergeometric test.
3393) Epstein JA, Glaser T, Cai J, Jepeal L, Walton DS, et al. (1994) Two independent and interactive DNA-binding subdomains of the Pax6 paired domain are regulated by alternative splicing.
3394) Yang Y, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Cvekl A (2004) Transcriptional regulation of mouse alphaB- and gammaF-crystallin genes in lens: opposite promoter-specific interactions between Pax6 and large Maf transcription factors.
3395) Grishok A, Pasquinelli AE, Conte D, Li N, Parrish S, et al. (2001) Genes and mechanisms related to RNA interference regulate expression of the small temporal RNAs that control C. elegans developmental timing.
3396) Adijanto J, Castorino JJ, Wang ZX, Maminishkis A, Grunwald GB, et al. (2012) Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) promotes differentiation of human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) by regulating microRNA-204/211 expression.
3403) Zhang X, Friedman A, Heaney S, Purcell P, Maas RL (2002) Meis homeoproteins directly regulate Pax6 during vertebrate lens morphogenesis.
3408) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3433) Neurogenetics 11: 185–191 [PMC free article] [PubMed]51.
3472) Neurogenetics 11: 185–191 [PMC free article] [PubMed]51.
3487) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3488) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3489) Considering the possibility that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression directly during eye development, we compared the spatio-temporal expression patterns of Pax6 protein and Trpm3 mRNA during eye morphogenesis and differentiation (Figure 1).
3490) In contrast, from E10.5 onwards, Trpm3 mRNA was co-expressed with Pax6 protein in the lens and optic cup (OC) lineages.
3493) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3494) This up-regulation of the lacZ reporter may be due to loss of miR-204 binding sites within the 3′ UTR, which were replaced with the lacZ gene, or to persistence of β-galactosidase protein in the slow-metabolizing lens fibers.
3495) Furthermore, comparison of the protein sequences together with phylogenetic analysis of many known vertebrate Trpm1 and Trpm3 proteins (human, caw, mouse, rat, chicken, Xenopus, zebrafish, Table S6) using PHYLIP package tools [41] identified ol-Trpm1 as more closely related to the mammalian Trpm3 than to mammalian Trpm1 (Figure S6).
3496) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3499) The parameters were: 95°C/10 min followed by 45 cycles of 94°C/10 s, 60°C/20 s and 72°C/30 s.Immunofluorescence quantification of protein levelsFor Sox11 repression by miR-204, Neuro-2a cells (ATCC) were grown on coverslips in 24-well plates for 24 h and then co-transfected with 500 ng of pCAG-GFP expression plasmid and either 500 ng of scrambled-miRVec or miR-204-miRVec expression plasmid containing the pre-miRNA of miR-204 [75].
3501) The patterns and number of mismatch that were identified for each of the putative binding sequences are presented.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(17K, docx)Table S4Primers used for detection of transcript levels of specific genes using q-PCR.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(16K, docx)Table S5Sequences employed for functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture and in fish embryos.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(14K, docx)Table S6The protein sequences of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 orthologues from various species for phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes (Figure S6).(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(33K, docx)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to Michael L.
3502) Zhang X, Friedman A, Heaney S, Purcell P, Maas RL (2002) Meis homeoproteins directly regulate Pax6 during vertebrate lens morphogenesis.
3504) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3506) These findings strongly support genetic regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 by Pax6 in several ocular tissue types.Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences in vitro and in vivoTo determine whether Pax6 regulation of the Trpm3/miR-204 gene is direct, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify the binding region, in conjunction with in-silico TF binding site searches, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to precisely locate Pax6 binding sites.
3509) Two amplicons: A1 (chr19:22,524,578–697) and A2 (chr19:22,525,042–126) within the candidate regulatory region were enriched 16.3-fold (P = 0.0043) and 25.9-fold (P = 0.0098), respectively, compared to an upstream non-specific region (NSR-chr19:NSR-chr19:22,523,967–4079).Figure 2Figure 2Pax6 directly binds a Trpm3 enhancer sequence in vitro and in vivo.We tested four sequences (Trpm3.1–4) containing putative Pax6 binding sites using EMSA (prediction of target sites was performed as described in [30], EMSA described in [31], and the sequence similarities of Trpm3.1–Trpm3.4 to Pax6 binding matrices are presented in Table S2, Table S3).
3512) Therefore, we concluded that Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences located downstream of the second promoter of Trpm3.miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expressionSince miR-204 is down-regulated in ocular tissues depleted in Pax6, we next examined which downstream genes might be regulated by miR-204 in the developing mouse eye.
3513) Since most miRNA target sites can be found in the 3′ UTR segment of the target genes, we searched for putative miR-204 binding sites in the 3′ UTRs of all mouse genes (TargetScan Mouse, www.targetscan.org).
3514) From the list of genes containing conserved putative binding sites for miR-204, 35 were found to be up-regulated in the Pax6 mutant lens with at least a 1.5-fold change (Table 2).
3515) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3516) Therefore, miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expression.
3517) Several miRNA binding sites on the gene's 3′ UTR usually exhibit additive effects ([38]).
3518) This up-regulation of the lacZ reporter may be due to loss of miR-204 binding sites within the 3′ UTR, which were replaced with the lacZ gene, or to persistence of β-galactosidase protein in the slow-metabolizing lens fibers.
3520) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3521) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3522) Nevertheless, it is possible that binding sites, other than those tested here, play a role in the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6, and that Pax6 represses Sox11 in the presence of co-factors which are only available in the restricted developmental context of the embryonic lens in vivo.In the retina, Sox11 exhibits a dynamic pattern of expression.
3524) Control embryos were injected with 15 ng/µl of EGFP mRNA [76].Cell transfection and luciferase assaysFor miRNA-repression studies (Figure 3D), a 506-bp fragment of the Sox11 3′ UTR (spanning two miR-204 binding sites) or 484 bp of Elavl3's 3′ UTR was amplified by PCR from mouse brain cDNA and XhoI–NotI restriction sites were added with the following primers: Sox11 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCTGTTACTCTAGGGAGTTGA-3′ and (R) 5′-AAGGTCAAGCGGCCGCAAAGGGAAGAAGTGCCTGAA-3; Elavl3 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCAATGGTGCCCTACTCAGG-3′ and (R) 5′-AGGTCAAGCGGCCGCTTCCTGTGGCCATGTTTGCT-3′.The 3′ UTRs were cloned downstream of the Renilla luciferase reporter (psiCHECK™-2, Promega).
3525) For site-directed mutation, the miR-204 binding site on the 3′ UTRs (second binding site for Sox11), was mutated by PCR with PfuUltra II Fusion HS DNA Polymerase (Genex).
3526) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(66K, docx)Table S2List of oligonucleotide probes used for ChIP and EMSA.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(15K, docx)Table S3Selection of putative Pax6 binding sites.
3528) The putative Pax6 binding motifs were selected based on the sites identified using SELEX assay (Xie and Cvekl 2011, Epstein et al., 1994).
3529) The patterns and number of mismatch that were identified for each of the putative binding sequences are presented.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(17K, docx)Table S4Primers used for detection of transcript levels of specific genes using q-PCR.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(16K, docx)Table S5Sequences employed for functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture and in fish embryos.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(14K, docx)Table S6The protein sequences of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 orthologues from various species for phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes (Figure S6).(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(33K, docx)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to Michael L.
3530) Czerny T, Busslinger M (1995) DNA-binding and transactivation properties of Pax-6: three amino acids in the paired domain are responsible for the different sequence recognition of Pax-6 and BSAP (Pax-5).
3531) Epstein JA, Glaser T, Cai J, Jepeal L, Walton DS, et al. (1994) Two independent and interactive DNA-binding subdomains of the Pax6 paired domain are regulated by alternative splicing.
3534) This was confirmed at the mRNA level in a human lens cell line (H36CE) and mouse Neu-2a transfected with a mimic miR-204 (see below and Figure S8).
3535) Furthermore, comparison of the protein sequences together with phylogenetic analysis of many known vertebrate Trpm1 and Trpm3 proteins (human, caw, mouse, rat, chicken, Xenopus, zebrafish, Table S6) using PHYLIP package tools [41] identified ol-Trpm1 as more closely related to the mammalian Trpm3 than to mammalian Trpm1 (Figure S6).
3536) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3537) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3538) Each assay was performed in duplicate, with three biological repeats.For functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture (Figure 5A, Figure S8) the human lens cell line H36CE (Porter et al. 1998) was transfected and qRT-PCR experiments were performed as described [81].
3540) Lewis BP, Burge CB, Bartel DP (2005) Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targets.
3541) Adijanto J, Castorino JJ, Wang ZX, Maminishkis A, Grunwald GB, et al. (2012) Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) promotes differentiation of human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) by regulating microRNA-204/211 expression.
3543) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3544) Collectively, this study identifies a novel evolutionarily conserved mechanism by which Pax6 controls the down-regulation of multiple genes through direct up-regulation of miR-204.Go to:Author SummaryThe transcription factor Pax6 is reiteratively employed in space and time for the establishment of progenitor pools and the differentiation of neuronal and non-neuronal lineages of the CNS, pancreas, and eye.
3545) Lastly, by conducting parallel experiments in the medaka fish, we show that Pax6 control of miR-204 and its target genes is evolutionarily conserved between mammals and fish, stressing the biological importance of this pathway.
3546) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3547) In contrast, when we used a mutated version of the site that had the highest probability of conserved targeting (based on TargetScan version 6.2, position 914–921 on the 3′ UTR), luciferase levels were restored to control levels (96%, P = 0.20, Figure 3D arrow).
3548) This reveals the importance of this site for the regulation of Sox11, although the other sites may contribute as well.Pax6 negatively controls Sox11 expression in vivo in the lens and retinaSox11 has been shown to be required for ocular development in mice.
3551) In agreement with these results, transient transfection of HeLa cells with murine Pax6 activated a luciferase reporter construct containing the Trpm1P fragment significantly more than the luciferase activity observed in controls (Figure 4K).
3553) ol-Meis2, ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 transcripts were significantly reduced following treatment with hsa-miR-204 mimic, by 28±3.7%, 23±2.8%, 43±3,4% and 21±1% relative to the control, respectively (Figure 5B); these genes were up-regulated following treatment with the Mo-miR-204 by 26.5±4.9%, 38.5±7.8%, 21±4% and 29.4±1.1%, respectively, relative to the control (Figure 5B).
3554) Injection of mouse Pax6 mRNA into medaka embryos resulted in reduced expression of these three genes compared with control embryos injected with EGFP mRNA (ol-Sox11 was reduced to 45±5.1%, ol-Myo10 was reduced to 43±6.3%, and ol-Fbn2 to 56.4±2.1% Figure 5C).
3555) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3556) All animal work was conducted according to national and international guidelines and approved by the Tel Aviv University review board.Statistical analysisAll data were examined using two-tailed student's t-test unless otherwise stated.Microarray analysisPax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre and Pax6loxP/loxP E14.5 lenses were dissected; 20 lenses from each litter were pooled, resulting in three control (Pax6loxP/loxP) and three Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre samples.
3559) Cells were co-transfected with the construct (100 ng), expression vector pcDNA3/Pax6 (100 ng) and RL-TK plasmid with Renilla luciferase (10 ng) as a transfection-efficiency control.
3563) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1Volcano plot demonstrating differences in gene expression between Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-cre and control E14.5 lens.
3565) Sox11 expression detected by in-situ hybridization in control (A,B) and Pax6lacZ/lacZ (C,D) mutant eye on E9.5 (A,C) and E11.5 (B,D).
3566) Sox9 detected with antibodies (green) in the Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre (B) but not control Pax6loxP/loxP (A) lens on E14.5.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(3.8M, tif)Figure S6Phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes.
3571) Grishok A, Pasquinelli AE, Conte D, Li N, Parrish S, et al. (2001) Genes and mechanisms related to RNA interference regulate expression of the small temporal RNAs that control C. elegans developmental timing.
3575) Collectively, this study identifies a novel evolutionarily conserved mechanism by which Pax6 controls the down-regulation of multiple genes through direct up-regulation of miR-204.Go to:Author SummaryThe transcription factor Pax6 is reiteratively employed in space and time for the establishment of progenitor pools and the differentiation of neuronal and non-neuronal lineages of the CNS, pancreas, and eye.
3576) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3577) The four genes that were down-regulated in both lens and neuronal lineages are potential direct transcriptional targets of Pax6.
3578) Trpm3 is a melastatin-like cation channel which is sensitive to steroids, active in insulin-producing beta cells and a chemo- and thermosensor in the somatosensory system [20], [26], [27], while miR-204 has been documented to play a role in ocular lineages in fish and mammals [17], [18] and thus may mediate Pax6's inhibitory activity in the eye.Table 1Table 1Pax6 targets that are reduced in developing lens (E14.5) and forebrain (E12.5).Pax6 is required for Trpm3/miR-204 expression during lens developmentTrpm3 transcript distribution in the post-natal eye shows some overlap with Pax6 expression [18], [21], [22].
3579) In contrast, from E10.5 onwards, Trpm3 mRNA was co-expressed with Pax6 protein in the lens and optic cup (OC) lineages.
3581) This was confirmed at the mRNA level in a human lens cell line (H36CE) and mouse Neu-2a transfected with a mimic miR-204 (see below and Figure S8).
3584) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3585) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3586) Pax6, a regulator of multiple processes during eye development, is shown to execute part of its gene regulation through direct activation of miR-204.Go to:Materials and MethodsMouse linesThe mouse lines employed in this study have been previously described: Pax6loxP [67], Mlr10-cre [68], αCre [29], Pax6lacz [69].
3587) All animal work was conducted according to national and international guidelines and approved by the Tel Aviv University review board.Statistical analysisAll data were examined using two-tailed student's t-test unless otherwise stated.Microarray analysisPax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre and Pax6loxP/loxP E14.5 lenses were dissected; 20 lenses from each litter were pooled, resulting in three control (Pax6loxP/loxP) and three Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre samples.
3589) Three independent stable transgenic lines were generated for the tested construct.mRNA injection of medaka embryosIn-vitro synthesis of mouse Pax6 mRNA (cDNA from [80]) was performed as described previously [76].
3590) Each assay was performed in duplicate, with three biological repeats.For functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture (Figure 5A, Figure S8) the human lens cell line H36CE (Porter et al. 1998) was transfected and qRT-PCR experiments were performed as described [81].
3592) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3593) Recent studies have established a dual role for the transcription factor Pax6 as both an activator and repressor of gene expression in the eye, central nervous system, and pancreas.
3595) Collectively, this study identifies a novel evolutionarily conserved mechanism by which Pax6 controls the down-regulation of multiple genes through direct up-regulation of miR-204.Go to:Author SummaryThe transcription factor Pax6 is reiteratively employed in space and time for the establishment of progenitor pools and the differentiation of neuronal and non-neuronal lineages of the CNS, pancreas, and eye.
3596) Execution of these diverse developmental programs depends on simultaneous activation and repression of gene networks functioning downstream of Pax6.
3597) Pax6 regulation of miR-204 explains part of the complex, divergent inhibitory activity of Pax6 in ocular progenitor cells, which is required to establish and maintain the identity and function of ocular tissues.Go to:IntroductionLineage-specific transcription factors (TFs) such as Pax6 direct the development of multiple tissues through the regulation of gene networks that execute discrete developmental programs.
3598) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3599) Pax6 may also enhance gene expression by recruiting chromatin-remodeling enzymes and alleviating heterochromatin repression [4], [7], [8].
3602) Therefore, regulation of a miRNA gene by a tissue-specific TF can facilitate the down-regulation of batteries of genes.To ascertain the roles of miRNAs in eye development, somatic mutations of the miRNA-maturation enzyme gene Dicer1 were examined in the mouse lens and retinal progenitors cells (RPCs, [14]–[16]).
3607) In the post-natal mouse eye, its pattern resembles that of Pax6 (Figure 1;[21], [23]).Figure 1Figure 1Trpm3/miR-204 expression is dependent on Pax6 activity during eye development.The present study was aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanism of Pax6-dependent transcriptional repression through unbiased analysis of up-regulated genes in Pax6-mutant lenses.
3608) We show that inhibition of gene expression by Pax6 is at least partly mediated through direct activation of miR-204.
3609) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3610) This raised the possibility of Pax6's role in directly or indirectly repressing the expression of a large number of genes.To identify common targets of Pax6, we compared the list of altered genes in the lens and embryonic neocortex [25].
3611) The four genes that were down-regulated in both lens and neuronal lineages are potential direct transcriptional targets of Pax6.
3612) Considering the possibility that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression directly during eye development, we compared the spatio-temporal expression patterns of Pax6 protein and Trpm3 mRNA during eye morphogenesis and differentiation (Figure 1).
3616) From that stage onwards, Trpm3 expression recapitulated the complex ocular pattern of Pax6 expression, suggesting that Pax6 regulates Trpm3 expression in the developing lens and OC derivatives.To determine whether Pax6 simultaneously regulates Trpm3 and its hosted non-coding miR-204, Pax6 systemic knockout (Pax6lacZ/lacZ, E11.5) and Pax6 lens-specific conditional mutants (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, E14.5) were examined (Figure 1).
3621) These findings strongly support genetic regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 by Pax6 in several ocular tissue types.Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences in vitro and in vivoTo determine whether Pax6 regulation of the Trpm3/miR-204 gene is direct, we utilized chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay to identify the binding region, in conjunction with in-silico TF binding site searches, followed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) to precisely locate Pax6 binding sites.
3622) Two amplicons: A1 (chr19:22,524,578–697) and A2 (chr19:22,525,042–126) within the candidate regulatory region were enriched 16.3-fold (P = 0.0043) and 25.9-fold (P = 0.0098), respectively, compared to an upstream non-specific region (NSR-chr19:NSR-chr19:22,523,967–4079).Figure 2Figure 2Pax6 directly binds a Trpm3 enhancer sequence in vitro and in vivo.We tested four sequences (Trpm3.1–4) containing putative Pax6 binding sites using EMSA (prediction of target sites was performed as described in [30], EMSA described in [31], and the sequence similarities of Trpm3.1–Trpm3.4 to Pax6 binding matrices are presented in Table S2, Table S3).
3623) Therefore, we concluded that Pax6 directly binds Trpm3 regulatory sequences located downstream of the second promoter of Trpm3.miR-204 binds the 3′ UTR of Sox11 and down-regulates its expressionSince miR-204 is down-regulated in ocular tissues depleted in Pax6, we next examined which downstream genes might be regulated by miR-204 in the developing mouse eye.
3627) This was confirmed at the mRNA level in a human lens cell line (H36CE) and mouse Neu-2a transfected with a mimic miR-204 (see below and Figure S8).
3628) Therefore, miR-204 is able to down-regulate the level of Sox11 transcript and protein in culture.Figure 3Figure 3miR-204 down-regulates the expression of Sox11.To determine whether Sox11 down-regulation is a result of direct binding, part of the wild-type 3′ UTR of Sox11, containing the first two putative miR-204 binding sites, was cloned downstream of the luciferase gene and compared to a mutated version of the 3′ UTR.
3630) Several miRNA binding sites on the gene's 3′ UTR usually exhibit additive effects ([38]).
3635) The ol-Trpm1 was expressed in the LP, neuroretina, ciliary marginal zone, ciliary body and presumed RPE (Figure 4C, 4F), suggesting that both ol-Trpm3 and ol-Trpm1 may have undergone a process of divergent gene functionalization, a common evolutionary process in teleost species [40].
3636) Utilizing phylogenetic footprinting in sequences from related species [42], we identified putative Pax6 cis-regulatory elements within the first 1.5 kb upstream of the ol-Trpm1 coding region (Figure 4E).
3638) Notably, no ectopic EGFP expression was observed in regions other than the retina, supporting tissue-specific Pax6-mediated activation of ol-Trpm1/miR-204 expression.
3640) In agreement with these results, transient transfection of HeLa cells with murine Pax6 activated a luciferase reporter construct containing the Trpm1P fragment significantly more than the luciferase activity observed in controls (Figure 4K).
3641) Collectively, these findings revealed that Pax6 is able to regulate the Trpm1/miR-204 promoter in fish, similar to its regulation of Trpm3/miR-204 in mice.miR-204 mediates Pax6 suppression of Sox11 and additional genes in the lens and in medaka embryosTo further evaluate the contribution of miR-204 to the phenotype observed following loss of Pax6, we tested the response of a subset of seven additional genes (Cpn8, Satb2, Hcn2, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, and Elavl3) that were both up-regulated in Pax6-negative lenses and contained putative miR-204 binding sites in their 3′ UTR (Table 2) to over-expression of hsa-miR-204 mimic.
3642) Most of these genes were examined in the human lens H36CE cell line, whereas Elavl3, a member of the Hu family of neuronal RNA binding proteins, was examined in mouse Neu-2a cells (Figure S8) because of its low expression levels in the lens cell line (data not shown).
3643) From the eight genes that were tested, including Sox11, six were down-regulated in response to hsa-miR-204 mimic; the five reduced in H36CE cells were also significantly elevated following transfection with hsa-miR-204 inhibitor (Cpn8, Nfia, Myo10, Fbn2, Sox11; Figure 5A).
3644) Luciferase assay conducted on the Elavl3 3′ UTR further supported direct regulation of Elavl3 by miR-204, and antibody labeling revealed expansion of Elavl3 expression to the posterior lens cells of Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre mutants (Figure S8, [43]).Figure 5Figure 5miR-204 affects expression of multiple genes and mediates Pax6 suppression of gene expression.As the expression pattern and regulation of miR-204 seem to be conserved between fish and mammals ([17], Figure 4), we also expected conservation of miR-204 activity.
3648) ol-Meis2, ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 transcripts were significantly reduced following treatment with hsa-miR-204 mimic, by 28±3.7%, 23±2.8%, 43±3,4% and 21±1% relative to the control, respectively (Figure 5B); these genes were up-regulated following treatment with the Mo-miR-204 by 26.5±4.9%, 38.5±7.8%, 21±4% and 29.4±1.1%, respectively, relative to the control (Figure 5B).
3649) Injection of mouse Pax6 mRNA into medaka embryos resulted in reduced expression of these three genes compared with control embryos injected with EGFP mRNA (ol-Sox11 was reduced to 45±5.1%, ol-Myo10 was reduced to 43±6.3%, and ol-Fbn2 to 56.4±2.1% Figure 5C).
3650) This reduction was significantly alleviated when embryos were co-injected with Mo-miR-204 (ol-Sox11 was rescued by 28.5±1%, ol-Myo10 by 26±3%, and ol-Fbn2 by 18.4±1.4%) (Figure 5C), indicating that at least part of the repression is mediated through miR-204 activity.Collectively, and similar to mammals, the expression of ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 is negatively regulated by Pax6 and ol-miR-204 in medaka fish.
3651) These findings reveal several novel targets of miR-204 in the lens and demonstrate how Pax6 direct control of miR-204 can simultaneously inhibit multiple genes, thus tightly regulating normal lens fate and physiology.Go to:DiscussionIn this paper we establish Pax6 as an indirect negative regulator of gene expression through miR-204.
3653) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3655) The identification of multiple genes responding to miR-204, and the finding that some of these targets are conserved among vertebrates (Sox11, Fbn2, Myo10), suggest a major effect of miR-204 in regulating LE fate and cell behavior.
3656) Furthermore, as miR-204 is expressed in several epithelial tissues that originate from the neuroectoderm, including the ciliary body, iris and choroid plexus, it is possible that miR-204 plays a more general role in maintenance of a non-neuronal fate of various epithelia within the CNS.Figure 6Figure 6Model of Pax6 genetic regulation of Sox11 during ocular development.miR-204 was found to negatively regulate the expression of ol-Meis2 in the eye of medaka fish [17].
3657) This regulatory loop may only be relevant at early stages of lens development, because in the mouse lens, Meis1 and Meis2 expression is lost before E12.5 [53], whereas Pax6 and miR-204 expression is maintained throughout development (Figure 1).
3658) Further analysis is required to substantiate the relevance of the miR-204–Meis1/2–Pax6 feedback loop in maintaining correct Pax6 dosage during early stages of lens development.Pax6 regulation of neuronal SOX genesA previous global analysis of gene expression revealed a significant number of neuron-specific genes that are up-regulated in Pax6-heterozygous lenses [31].
3659) The propensity for Pax6 to repress SOX genes in the lens could be a way of silencing competing genetic programs.In this paper, we focused on the regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 to determine the mechanism underlying Pax6 inhibitory activity during organ formation.
3662) In cells that express miR-204, the regulation of Sox11 by Pax6 becomes inhibitory, contributing to loss of Sox11 expression from the lens fibers (Figure 3 and Figure 6).
3663) We therefore considered the possibility that Pax6 might negatively regulate Sox11 transcription directly, in addition to repressing expression through miR-204.
3668) Therefore, Pax6 regulation of Sox11 during retinogenesis is expected to be part of a larger regulatory network, and may be repressed by miR-204 in only a subset of RPCs.In conclusion, this study reveals novel involvement of miRNA-based gene repression during lens and retinal development.
3669) Pax6, a regulator of multiple processes during eye development, is shown to execute part of its gene regulation through direct activation of miR-204.Go to:Materials and MethodsMouse linesThe mouse lines employed in this study have been previously described: Pax6loxP [67], Mlr10-cre [68], αCre [29], Pax6lacz [69].
3670) All animal work was conducted according to national and international guidelines and approved by the Tel Aviv University review board.Statistical analysisAll data were examined using two-tailed student's t-test unless otherwise stated.Microarray analysisPax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre and Pax6loxP/loxP E14.5 lenses were dissected; 20 lenses from each litter were pooled, resulting in three control (Pax6loxP/loxP) and three Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre samples.
3676) The parameters were: 95°C/10 min followed by 45 cycles of 94°C/10 s, 60°C/20 s and 72°C/30 s.Immunofluorescence quantification of protein levelsFor Sox11 repression by miR-204, Neuro-2a cells (ATCC) were grown on coverslips in 24-well plates for 24 h and then co-transfected with 500 ng of pCAG-GFP expression plasmid and either 500 ng of scrambled-miRVec or miR-204-miRVec expression plasmid containing the pre-miRNA of miR-204 [75].
3681) A 1.5-kb region of ol-Trpm1 genomic sequence containing the start codon using the primers: ol-Trpm1 forward 5′-TGTATCATGAGCCGCTAATG-3′ and ol-Trpm1 reverse 5′-GCAGCACCAGGAGAAGGCTC-3′, was cloned in frame with an EGFP reporter gene into the pSKII-ISceI-EGFP and pGL3 basic vectors [76] to create the Trpm1P:GFP and Trpm1:Luc constructs.Phylogenetic analysisSequence alignments were performed using the VISTA [77] and Multalign programs [78], which are available at the corresponding websites: [http://genome.lbl.gov/vista/index.shtml and [http://bioinfo.genopole-toulouse.prd.fr/multalin/multalin.html].
3682) Three independent stable transgenic lines were generated for the tested construct.mRNA injection of medaka embryosIn-vitro synthesis of mouse Pax6 mRNA (cDNA from [80]) was performed as described previously [76].
3685) Control embryos were injected with 15 ng/µl of EGFP mRNA [76].Cell transfection and luciferase assaysFor miRNA-repression studies (Figure 3D), a 506-bp fragment of the Sox11 3′ UTR (spanning two miR-204 binding sites) or 484 bp of Elavl3's 3′ UTR was amplified by PCR from mouse brain cDNA and XhoI–NotI restriction sites were added with the following primers: Sox11 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCTGTTACTCTAGGGAGTTGA-3′ and (R) 5′-AAGGTCAAGCGGCCGCAAAGGGAAGAAGTGCCTGAA-3; Elavl3 (F) 5′-ACACTCGAGCAATGGTGCCCTACTCAGG-3′ and (R) 5′-AGGTCAAGCGGCCGCTTCCTGTGGCCATGTTTGCT-3′.The 3′ UTRs were cloned downstream of the Renilla luciferase reporter (psiCHECK™-2, Promega).
3686) For site-directed mutation, the miR-204 binding site on the 3′ UTRs (second binding site for Sox11), was mutated by PCR with PfuUltra II Fusion HS DNA Polymerase (Genex).
3688) Cells were co-transfected with the construct (100 ng), expression vector pcDNA3/Pax6 (100 ng) and RL-TK plasmid with Renilla luciferase (10 ng) as a transfection-efficiency control.
3691) Each assay was performed in duplicate, with three biological repeats.For functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture (Figure 5A, Figure S8) the human lens cell line H36CE (Porter et al. 1998) was transfected and qRT-PCR experiments were performed as described [81].
3695) Primers used for qRT-PCR are listed in Table S4 and sequences of for functional studies of miR204 are listed in Table S5.qRT–PCR analysis of gene expression in injected embryosAt least 250 embryos were pooled in each assay.
3698) Sox11 expression detected by in-situ hybridization in control (A,B) and Pax6lacZ/lacZ (C,D) mutant eye on E9.5 (A,C) and E11.5 (B,D).
3699) Sox9 detected with antibodies (green) in the Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre (B) but not control Pax6loxP/loxP (A) lens on E14.5.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(3.8M, tif)Figure S6Phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes.
3704) Differentially expressed genes with P-values lower than 0.05 and with a fold-change cutoff of 1.5 are listed.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(66K, docx)Table S2List of oligonucleotide probes used for ChIP and EMSA.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(15K, docx)Table S3Selection of putative Pax6 binding sites.
3705) The putative Pax6 binding motifs were selected based on the sites identified using SELEX assay (Xie and Cvekl 2011, Epstein et al., 1994).
3707) The patterns and number of mismatch that were identified for each of the putative binding sequences are presented.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(17K, docx)Table S4Primers used for detection of transcript levels of specific genes using q-PCR.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(16K, docx)Table S5Sequences employed for functional studies of miR-204 in cell culture and in fish embryos.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(14K, docx)Table S6The protein sequences of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 orthologues from various species for phylogenetic analysis of the Trpm1 and Trpm3 genes (Figure S6).(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.(33K, docx)Go to:AcknowledgmentsWe are grateful to Michael L.
3710) Czerny T, Busslinger M (1995) DNA-binding and transactivation properties of Pax-6: three amino acids in the paired domain are responsible for the different sequence recognition of Pax-6 and BSAP (Pax-5).
3713) Yang Y, Chauhan BK, Cveklova K, Cvekl A (2004) Transcriptional regulation of mouse alphaB- and gammaF-crystallin genes in lens: opposite promoter-specific interactions between Pax6 and large Maf transcription factors.
3714) Grishok A, Pasquinelli AE, Conte D, Li N, Parrish S, et al. (2001) Genes and mechanisms related to RNA interference regulate expression of the small temporal RNAs that control C. elegans developmental timing.
3724) Zhang X, Friedman A, Heaney S, Purcell P, Maas RL (2002) Meis homeoproteins directly regulate Pax6 during vertebrate lens morphogenesis.
3731) Recent studies have established a dual role for the transcription factor Pax6 as both an activator and repressor of gene expression in the eye, central nervous system, and pancreas.
3733) Execution of these diverse developmental programs depends on simultaneous activation and repression of gene networks functioning downstream of Pax6.
3734) Pax6 regulation of miR-204 explains part of the complex, divergent inhibitory activity of Pax6 in ocular progenitor cells, which is required to establish and maintain the identity and function of ocular tissues.Go to:IntroductionLineage-specific transcription factors (TFs) such as Pax6 direct the development of multiple tissues through the regulation of gene networks that execute discrete developmental programs.
3735) Pax6 is considered a “master regulator” of eye development as it specifies the multiple cell lineages that comprise the eye in vertebrate and invertebrate species [3].During embryonic development, Pax6 protein is known to activate several target genes using two DNA-binding domains and a proline-serine-threonine transcription activating domain [4]–[6].
3739) In the post-natal mouse eye, its pattern resembles that of Pax6 (Figure 1;[21], [23]).Figure 1Figure 1Trpm3/miR-204 expression is dependent on Pax6 activity during eye development.The present study was aimed at elucidating the molecular mechanism of Pax6-dependent transcriptional repression through unbiased analysis of up-regulated genes in Pax6-mutant lenses.
3740) We show that inhibition of gene expression by Pax6 is at least partly mediated through direct activation of miR-204.
3741) This study is the first to reveal that miRNAs are part of the Pax6 genetic network in different vertebrate species, adding to the known repertoire of Pax6 activities in the course of organ development.Go to:ResultsLarge-scale changes in the lens transcriptome as a result of Pax6 deletionTo identify new Pax6 genetic targets in the developing lens, an expression microarray was performed on embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) lenses from controls and somatic mutants of Pax6 (Pax6loxP/loxP;Mlr10-cre, [24]).
3742) Trpm3 is a melastatin-like cation channel which is sensitive to steroids, active in insulin-producing beta cells and a chemo- and thermosensor in the somatosensory system [20], [26], [27], while miR-204 has been documented to play a role in ocular lineages in fish and mammals [17], [18] and thus may mediate Pax6's inhibitory activity in the eye.Table 1Table 1Pax6 targets that are reduced in developing lens (E14.5) and forebrain (E12.5).Pax6 is required for Trpm3/miR-204 expression during lens developmentTrpm3 transcript distribution in the post-natal eye shows some overlap with Pax6 expression [18], [21], [22].
3745) Notably, no ectopic EGFP expression was observed in regions other than the retina, supporting tissue-specific Pax6-mediated activation of ol-Trpm1/miR-204 expression.
3746) In agreement with these results, transient transfection of HeLa cells with murine Pax6 activated a luciferase reporter construct containing the Trpm1P fragment significantly more than the luciferase activity observed in controls (Figure 4K).
3747) Luciferase assay conducted on the Elavl3 3′ UTR further supported direct regulation of Elavl3 by miR-204, and antibody labeling revealed expansion of Elavl3 expression to the posterior lens cells of Pax6loxP/loxP;Mrl10-Cre mutants (Figure S8, [43]).Figure 5Figure 5miR-204 affects expression of multiple genes and mediates Pax6 suppression of gene expression.As the expression pattern and regulation of miR-204 seem to be conserved between fish and mammals ([17], Figure 4), we also expected conservation of miR-204 activity.
3748) This reduction was significantly alleviated when embryos were co-injected with Mo-miR-204 (ol-Sox11 was rescued by 28.5±1%, ol-Myo10 by 26±3%, and ol-Fbn2 by 18.4±1.4%) (Figure 5C), indicating that at least part of the repression is mediated through miR-204 activity.Collectively, and similar to mammals, the expression of ol-Sox11, ol-Fbn2 and ol-Myo10 is negatively regulated by Pax6 and ol-miR-204 in medaka fish.
3750) In future studies it would be of interest to distinguish the different expression pattern of Trpm1/3 paralog genes and the functional activity of their hosted miRNAs in the different lineages.The roles of miR-204 in the eye have been recently examined using a primary culture of human fetal RPE.
3751) With this in mind, it is possible that part of Pax6's activity in inhibiting cataract formation is mediated by the activity of miR-204 in the lens and that restoration of miR-204 levels may prevent anterior subcapsular cataract formation.In addition, the novel miR-204 targets in lens development uncovered here include genes involved in cell motility Myo10 [48], cell matrix and regulation of the TGFβ pathway Fbn2 [49], and genes that function in neuronal or glia cells Sox11 [37], Elavl3 [43], Cpne8 [50] and Nfia [51].
3752) The propensity for Pax6 to repress SOX genes in the lens could be a way of silencing competing genetic programs.In this paper, we focused on the regulatory interaction between Pax6 and Sox11 to determine the mechanism underlying Pax6 inhibitory activity during organ formation.
3753) Pax6, a regulator of multiple processes during eye development, is shown to execute part of its gene regulation through direct activation of miR-204.Go to:Materials and MethodsMouse linesThe mouse lines employed in this study have been previously described: Pax6loxP [67], Mlr10-cre [68], αCre [29], Pax6lacz [69].
3756) Czerny T, Busslinger M (1995) DNA-binding and transactivation properties of Pax-6: three amino acids in the paired domain are responsible for the different sequence recognition of Pax-6 and BSAP (Pax-5).
3757) Epstein JA, Glaser T, Cai J, Jepeal L, Walton DS, et al. (1994) Two independent and interactive DNA-binding subdomains of the Pax6 paired domain are regulated by alternative splicing.
3759) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
3760) Bell,1 Carmit Levy,1 Raffaella Avellino,6 Sandro Banfi,6,7 Ivan Conte,6,* and Ruth Ashery-Padan1,4,*Claude Desplan, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractDuring development, tissue-specific transcription factors regulate both protein-coding and non-coding genes to control differentiation.
3762) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
3764) It has been recently demonstrated that ectopic expression of miR-143/145 results in repressed metastasis and increased adhesion of pancreatic cancer cells [30].
3769) Knockdown of DCLK1 resulted in increased expression of miR-143/145 cluster and downregulation of its downstream target KRAS (Figure 3D).
3771) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
3772) Previous studies have demonstrated that DCLK1 is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer tissues and co-localizes with SNAIL and SLUG.
3773) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, a significant downregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG was observed following increased expression of pri-miR-200a in AsPC-1 cancer cells [11].
3774) Furthermore, we wanted to investigate the effect of DCLK1 knockdown on expression of miR-200b and c in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.
3775) In many tumors, there is either overexpression of so-called oncogenic miRNAs (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or downregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
3776) Reduced miR-143/145 expression is a common feature of many tumor types including colorectal carcinoma and PDAC [29,50,51].
3777) Moreover, expression of these miRNAs inhibits proliferation and activates apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo [29].
3780) Our data suggest that by down-regulating DCLK1 expression in pancreatic cancer, we are directly inducing or facilitating upregulation of several endogenous miRNAs within the tumors.
3782) It has been recently reported that poorly differentiated breast, glioma and bladder cancer cells express a pluripotent stem cell-like signature [58].
3786) The inhibition of invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells was observed in the invasion assay following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure 5E and F).Overexpression of NOTCH1 led to the induction of EMT phenotype by activation of mesenchymal cell markers such as ZEB1, CD44, EpCAM, and Hes-1 [59].
3787) Furthermore, it was found that overexpression of miR-200 family significantly inhibits the NOTCH pathway in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggests the NOTCH pathway may be one of the miR-200 targets [60].
3788) A and B, A decreased expression of c-MYC mRNA (using quantitative real-time RT-PCR) and protein (using Western blot) was observed in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts following knockdown of DCLK1.
3789) C, Decreased expression of c-MYC protein (brown) was observed following the knockdown of DCLK1 by immunohistochemical analyses.
3791) siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 in BxPC-3 results in decreased expression of DCLK1 mRNA (A), increased expression Let-7a, miR-144 and miR-143/145 (B), decreased expression of c-MYC and NOTCH1 (C), and decreased expression of NANOG, KLF4, OCT4 and SOX2 (D).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(576K, tif)Figure S4NPsiRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 downregulates EMT transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and angiogenic factors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 via miR-200 in BxPC-3 cells.
3793) Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H et al. (2004) Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
3797) Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW et al. (2008) An embryonic stem cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive human tumors.
3798) Specificity of DCLK1 post-transcriptional regulation of the downstream targets of miR-145, miR-200 and let-7a was accomplished utilizing a luciferase-based reporter assay.
3800) Additionally, KRAS and RREB1 are targets of miR-143/145, demonstrating a feed-forward mechanism that potentiates RAS signaling-mediated PDAC tumor progression [29].
3801) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
3802) These data suggest that knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of miR-145 miRNA downstream targets in pancreatic cancer cells.
3804) Knockdown of DCLK1 resulted in increased expression of miR-143/145 cluster and downregulation of its downstream target KRAS (Figure 3D).
3805) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
3807) In pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant upregulation of let-7a (Figure 4A) and subsequent downregulation of its downstream target c-MYC (mRNA and protein) (Figure S1).
3809) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of let-7-dependent luciferase activity (Figure 4B) indicating that NPsiDCLK1 regulates downstream targets of let-7 in pancreatic cancer cells.
3813) Similarly to our previous studies, following the knockdown of DCLK1, we also observed inhibition of NOTCH1 via miR-144 (Figure S2) in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 5Figure 5DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-200 and inhibits EMT and invasion.DCLK1 regulates angiogenic factors in PDACIt has been demonstrated that miR-200 inhibits lung adenocarcinoma invasion and metastasis by targeting VEGFR1.
3816) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
3817) In this report, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating several tumor suppressor miRNAs and downstream oncogenic targets, DCLK1 inhibition results in upregulation of miRNAs that negatively regulate several key pluripotency and pro-angiogenic factors.
3818) The miRNA restitution was confirmed in treated xenografts by significant upregulation of the corresponding miRNA and significant decreases in specific miRNA targets (KRAS2 and RREB1 for miR-143/145).
3819) Recently, it was reported that miR-145 inhibits cell proliferation of human lung adenocarcinoma by targeting EGFR, indicating that miR-145 is a tumor suppressor miRNA [55].
3821) The role of DCLK1 in the regulation of pluripotency in a cancer context is novel and may present an exciting new target for anti-cancer based therapy.
3822) For example, a single therapeutic miRNA may regulate hundreds of critical pathways that drive tumorigenesis; whereas, the introduction of a single DCLK1 targeted agent may induce multiple therapeutic miRNAs.
3823) Furthermore, it was found that overexpression of miR-200 family significantly inhibits the NOTCH pathway in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggests the NOTCH pathway may be one of the miR-200 targets [60].
3824) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
3825) This combined with its central regulatory role in stem cell-like processes, pluripotency factor regulation, EMT and angiogenesis makes it an ideal and novel target for therapy in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other solid tumors.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of c-MYC in pancreatic tumor xenografts.
3829) The dysregulation of these processes is believed to play key roles in tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis, and is contributory to PDAC being the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US.
3830) The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic potential in PDAC.
3835) We conclude that DCLK1 plays a significant master regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis through the regulation of multiple tumor suppressor miRNAs and their downstream pro-tumorigenic pathways.
3837) Another critical obstacle in combating solid tumor cancers in general is the heterogeneity of cell types within the tumor microenvironment [5] and the highly desmoplastic tumor niche [6].
3839) Consequently miRNAs have been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or tumor suppressors (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
3840) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
3841) In cancer, miR-145 is downregulated and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor properties.
3842) The loss of miR-145 (miR-143/145 cluster) is observed in KRAS mutated pancreatic cancers, and therapeutic restoration of these miRNAs abrogates tumorigenesis [29,30].
3843) Additionally, KRAS and RREB1 are targets of miR-143/145, demonstrating a feed-forward mechanism that potentiates RAS signaling-mediated PDAC tumor progression [29].
3844) These data taken together suggest that miR-145 is a master regulator of iPSCs factors in ESCs and CSCs and may play an important role in inhibition of pancreatic cancer initiation, progression and EMT.Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling plays an important role in tumor angiogenesis.
3847) Studies using soluble VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 (inhibition of VEGFR-mediated signaling in a dominant-negative manner) or the VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors resulted in inhibition of tumor angiogenesis, growth and metastasis in PDAC mouse models [35–38].DCLK1 (formerly known as DCAMKL-1) is a putative intestinal and pancreatic stem cell marker and is upregulated in the stroma and epithelium of PDAC.
3848) It negatively regulates several tumor suppressor miRNAs and likely plays a key role in initiation and progression of solid tumor cancers [11,41].
3850) In this report, following the knockdown of DCLK1 using nanoparticle-encapsulated siRNA (NPsiDCLK1) in tumor xenografted mice, we observed a significant increase in: (A) miR-143/145 cluster, which resulted in downregulation of key pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and NANOG); (B) let-7a, which resulted in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (C) miR-200a, b and c, which resulted in downregulation of EMT and angiogenic factors.
3851) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
3854) NPs were reconstituted in sterile normal saline and injected directly into the tumors.
3856) Detailed descriptions are provided in the Supplementary section of Materials and Methods (Text S1).Go to:ResultsRNA silencing of DCLK1 inhibits pancreatic cancer xenograft growthAsPC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice and tumors were allowed to develop for 30 days.
3862) These data taken together demonstrate that inhibition of DCLK1 results in AsPC-1 tumor xenograft growth arrest.Figure 1Figure 1DCLK1 is essential for human pancreatic tumor xenograft growth.Knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of pluripotency factors in pancreatic tumor xenografts via miR-145It has been demonstrated that OCT4, SOX2, c-MYC, LIN28, NANOG and KLF4 are required for ESC self-renewal and pluripotency and are upregulated in some aggressive cancers and in CSCs [23–26,28].
3863) Additionally, we also observed a significant (>40%) downregulation of OCT4 (Figure 2E) and SOX2 (Figure 2F) at the mRNA level following the knockdown of DCLK1 in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 2Figure 2DCLK1 regulates pluripotency.DCLK1 post-transcriptionally regulates miR-145 in pancreatic cancermiR-145 has been shown to repress OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4, thereby repressing pluripotency and controlling differentiation [21].
3864) miR-145 is downregulated in various cancers and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor and metastasis inhibitory properties [29,30].
3867) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
3868) In pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant upregulation of let-7a (Figure 4A) and subsequent downregulation of its downstream target c-MYC (mRNA and protein) (Figure S1).
3869) Based on real-time RT-PCR analysis of tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of LIN28B mRNA compared to NPsiSCR or control-treated tumors (Figure 4C).
3871) Furthermore, we wanted to investigate the effect of DCLK1 knockdown on expression of miR-200b and c in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.
3873) These data taken together indicate that knockdown of DCLK1 inhibits EMT and invasion by regulating miR-200 in human pancreatic tumor xenografts and cancer cells.
3874) Similarly to our previous studies, following the knockdown of DCLK1, we also observed inhibition of NOTCH1 via miR-144 (Figure S2) in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 5Figure 5DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-200 and inhibits EMT and invasion.DCLK1 regulates angiogenic factors in PDACIt has been demonstrated that miR-200 inhibits lung adenocarcinoma invasion and metastasis by targeting VEGFR1.
3875) We observed a significant downregulation of VEGFR1 mRNA (Figure 6A), protein (Figure 6B and C – left panel) in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 compared to control and NPsiSCR treated-tumors.
3876) We also observed downregulation of VEGFR2 mRNA (Figure 6E) and protein (Figure 6C – right panel) in pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1.
3877) In many tumors, there is either overexpression of so-called oncogenic miRNAs (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or downregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
3879) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
3881) In this report, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating several tumor suppressor miRNAs and downstream oncogenic targets, DCLK1 inhibition results in upregulation of miRNAs that negatively regulate several key pluripotency and pro-angiogenic factors.
3882) These data support the notion that the DCLK1 is a central regulator of the tumor process.Repression of miR-143 and miR-145, two co-transcribed miRNAs located on human chromosome 5q, has been reported in pancreatic cancer.
3884) Reduced miR-143/145 expression is a common feature of many tumor types including colorectal carcinoma and PDAC [29,50,51].
3885) Here, we observed downregulation of c-MYC and KRAS via let-7a in AsPC1 tumor xenografts following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure S1 and Figure 3D) (a similar mechanism was previously demonstrated in pancreatic cancer cells).Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is upregulated in various cancer including pancreatic [53].
3886) Recently, it was reported that miR-145 inhibits cell proliferation of human lung adenocarcinoma by targeting EGFR, indicating that miR-145 is a tumor suppressor miRNA [55].
3887) We expect EGF signaling will also be downregulated following the knockdown of DCLK1.VEGF and its receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 have been demonstrated to play an important role in tumor vascular growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis [34].
3888) Though PDAC is not a grossly vascular tumor, they exhibit endothelial cell proliferation, one of the mechanisms that increase angiogenesis [38].
3890) Our data suggest that by down-regulating DCLK1 expression in pancreatic cancer, we are directly inducing or facilitating upregulation of several endogenous miRNAs within the tumors.
3891) Using this candidate approach, we contend that endogenous upregulation of tumor suppressors may have an advantage over small molecule inhibitor-based approaches or even protein or miRNA replacement therapies.
3892) For example, a single therapeutic miRNA may regulate hundreds of critical pathways that drive tumorigenesis; whereas, the introduction of a single DCLK1 targeted agent may induce multiple therapeutic miRNAs.
3893) In this report, consistent with our previous studies, we observed downregulation of NOTCH1 in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 (Figure S2).All of these studies indicate that pluripotency, angiogenesis, EMT, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness are all involved in the complex interplay of cellular signaling, which are critical features of the tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer that play an important role in cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.
3895) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
3896) This combined with its central regulatory role in stem cell-like processes, pluripotency factor regulation, EMT and angiogenesis makes it an ideal and novel target for therapy in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other solid tumors.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of c-MYC in pancreatic tumor xenografts.
3897) A and B, A decreased expression of c-MYC mRNA (using quantitative real-time RT-PCR) and protein (using Western blot) was observed in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts following knockdown of DCLK1.
3900) Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW et al. (2007) Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer.
3902) Sureban SM, May R, Mondalek FG, Qu D, Ponnurangam S et al. (2011) Nanoparticle-based delivery of siDCAMKL-1 increases microRNA-144 and inhibits colorectal cancer tumor growth via a Notch-1 dependent mechanism.
3903) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
3907) Ogawa T, Takayama K, Takakura N, Kitano S, Ueno H (2002) Anti-tumor angiogenesis therapy using soluble receptors: enhanced inhibition of tumor growth when soluble fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 is used with soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
3911) Pramanik D, Campbell NR, Karikari C, Chivukula R, Kent OA et al. (2011) Restitution of tumor suppressor microRNAs using a systemic nanovector inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in mice.
3912) Zhu H, Dougherty U, Robinson V, Mustafi R, Pekow J et al. (2011) EGFR signals downregulate tumor suppressors miR-143 and miR-145 in Western diet-promoted murine colon cancer: role of G1 regulators.
3913) Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW et al. (2008) An embryonic stem cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive human tumors.
3914) Houchen1,4,5,*Chunming Liu, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractStem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers.
3915) The dysregulation of these processes is believed to play key roles in tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis, and is contributory to PDAC being the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US.
3919) Another critical obstacle in combating solid tumor cancers in general is the heterogeneity of cell types within the tumor microenvironment [5] and the highly desmoplastic tumor niche [6].
3921) A strong link between miRNA dysregulation and human cancer has been established [14].
3922) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
3923) The reprogramming factors OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4, c-MYC, and LIN28 have also been suggested to be oncogenes and may be implicated in the development of several cancers [21–26].
3924) In cancer, miR-145 is downregulated and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor properties.
3925) The loss of miR-145 (miR-143/145 cluster) is observed in KRAS mutated pancreatic cancers, and therapeutic restoration of these miRNAs abrogates tumorigenesis [29,30].
3926) Furthermore, Ras-responsive element binding protein 1 (RREB1) represses miR-143/miR-145 promoter activity, which indicates that repression is an early event in pancreatic cancer initiation and progression [29].
3927) It has been recently demonstrated that ectopic expression of miR-143/145 results in repressed metastasis and increased adhesion of pancreatic cancer cells [30].
3928) These data taken together suggest that miR-145 is a master regulator of iPSCs factors in ESCs and CSCs and may play an important role in inhibition of pancreatic cancer initiation, progression and EMT.Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling plays an important role in tumor angiogenesis.
3929) It negatively regulates several tumor suppressor miRNAs and likely plays a key role in initiation and progression of solid tumor cancers [11,41].
3931) Detailed descriptions are provided in the Supplementary section of Materials and Methods (Text S1).Go to:ResultsRNA silencing of DCLK1 inhibits pancreatic cancer xenograft growthAsPC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice and tumors were allowed to develop for 30 days.
3933) These data taken together demonstrate that inhibition of DCLK1 results in AsPC-1 tumor xenograft growth arrest.Figure 1Figure 1DCLK1 is essential for human pancreatic tumor xenograft growth.Knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of pluripotency factors in pancreatic tumor xenografts via miR-145It has been demonstrated that OCT4, SOX2, c-MYC, LIN28, NANOG and KLF4 are required for ESC self-renewal and pluripotency and are upregulated in some aggressive cancers and in CSCs [23–26,28].
3934) Additionally, we also observed a significant (>40%) downregulation of OCT4 (Figure 2E) and SOX2 (Figure 2F) at the mRNA level following the knockdown of DCLK1 in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 2Figure 2DCLK1 regulates pluripotency.DCLK1 post-transcriptionally regulates miR-145 in pancreatic cancermiR-145 has been shown to repress OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4, thereby repressing pluripotency and controlling differentiation [21].
3935) miR-145 is downregulated in various cancers and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor and metastasis inhibitory properties [29,30].
3936) These data suggest that knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of miR-145 miRNA downstream targets in pancreatic cancer cells.
3937) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
3938) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of let-7-dependent luciferase activity (Figure 4B) indicating that NPsiDCLK1 regulates downstream targets of let-7 in pancreatic cancer cells.
3939) These data indicate that DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7-dependent mechanism.Figure 4Figure 4DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7a.DCLK1 regulates miR-200 family genes and EMT in pancreatic cancerEMT is a highly conserved process, characterized by the phenotypic conversion of epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells [7].
3941) Previous studies have demonstrated that DCLK1 is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer tissues and co-localizes with SNAIL and SLUG.
3942) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, a significant downregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG was observed following increased expression of pri-miR-200a in AsPC-1 cancer cells [11].
3943) These data taken together indicate that knockdown of DCLK1 inhibits EMT and invasion by regulating miR-200 in human pancreatic tumor xenografts and cancer cells.
3944) Dysregulation of miRNAs are quite common in many human cancers including PDAC.
3946) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
3947) These data support the notion that the DCLK1 is a central regulator of the tumor process.Repression of miR-143 and miR-145, two co-transcribed miRNAs located on human chromosome 5q, has been reported in pancreatic cancer.
3948) Moreover, expression of these miRNAs inhibits proliferation and activates apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo [29].
3949) Here, we observed downregulation of c-MYC and KRAS via let-7a in AsPC1 tumor xenografts following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure S1 and Figure 3D) (a similar mechanism was previously demonstrated in pancreatic cancer cells).Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is upregulated in various cancer including pancreatic [53].
3952) Angiogenic factors are upregulated in various cancers such as colorectal, breast, renal, liver, and ovarian and have been correlated with poor prognosis.
3953) Our data suggest that by down-regulating DCLK1 expression in pancreatic cancer, we are directly inducing or facilitating upregulation of several endogenous miRNAs within the tumors.
3954) The role of DCLK1 in the regulation of pluripotency in a cancer context is novel and may present an exciting new target for anti-cancer based therapy.
3955) These data provide the rationale for ongoing studies that investigate the role of DCLK1 in the regulation of miRNAs in cancer.It has been demonstrated that process of dedifferentiation and EMT may result in generation of stem cell-like properties.
3956) It has been recently reported that poorly differentiated breast, glioma and bladder cancer cells express a pluripotent stem cell-like signature [58].
3960) The inhibition of invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells was observed in the invasion assay following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure 5E and F).Overexpression of NOTCH1 led to the induction of EMT phenotype by activation of mesenchymal cell markers such as ZEB1, CD44, EpCAM, and Hes-1 [59].
3961) Furthermore, it was found that overexpression of miR-200 family significantly inhibits the NOTCH pathway in pancreatic cancer cells, which suggests the NOTCH pathway may be one of the miR-200 targets [60].
3962) In this report, consistent with our previous studies, we observed downregulation of NOTCH1 in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 (Figure S2).All of these studies indicate that pluripotency, angiogenesis, EMT, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness are all involved in the complex interplay of cellular signaling, which are critical features of the tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer that play an important role in cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.
3963) The studies presented clearly implicate DCLK1 in the regulation of miR-143/145, miR-200, EMT, pluripotency, angiogenesis, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness.
3964) Inhibition of multiple oncogenic pathways following the knockdown of DCLK1 was also observed in BxPC-3, human pancreatic cancer cell line (Figures S3 and S4).
3965) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
3967) This combined with its central regulatory role in stem cell-like processes, pluripotency factor regulation, EMT and angiogenesis makes it an ideal and novel target for therapy in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other solid tumors.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of c-MYC in pancreatic tumor xenografts.
3968) Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW et al. (2007) Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer.
3973) Sureban SM, May R, Mondalek FG, Qu D, Ponnurangam S et al. (2011) Nanoparticle-based delivery of siDCAMKL-1 increases microRNA-144 and inhibits colorectal cancer tumor growth via a Notch-1 dependent mechanism.
3976) Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H et al. (2004) Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
3983) Solorzano CC, Baker CH, Bruns CJ, Killion JJ, Ellis LM et al. (2001) Inhibition of growth and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer growing in nude mice by PTK 787/ZK222584, an inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases.
3986) Mondalek FG, Ponnurangam S, Govind J, Houchen C, Anant S et al. (2010) Inhibition of angiogenesis- and inflammation-inducing factors in human colon cancer cells in vitro and in ovo by free and nanoparticle-encapsulated redox dye, DCPIP.
3989) Pramanik D, Campbell NR, Karikari C, Chivukula R, Kent OA et al. (2011) Restitution of tumor suppressor microRNAs using a systemic nanovector inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in mice.
3990) Zhu H, Dougherty U, Robinson V, Mustafi R, Pekow J et al. (2011) EGFR signals downregulate tumor suppressors miR-143 and miR-145 in Western diet-promoted murine colon cancer: role of G1 regulators.
3993) Houchen1,4,5,*Chunming Liu, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractStem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers.
3994) The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic potential in PDAC.
3995) We conclude that DCLK1 plays a significant master regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis through the regulation of multiple tumor suppressor miRNAs and their downstream pro-tumorigenic pathways.
3996) Another critical obstacle in combating solid tumor cancers in general is the heterogeneity of cell types within the tumor microenvironment [5] and the highly desmoplastic tumor niche [6].
3999) Consequently miRNAs have been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or tumor suppressors (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
4000) Pluripotency transcription factors such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG and KLF4 form regulatory networks and influence a wide spectrum of downstream genes.
4001) The reprogramming factors OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4, c-MYC, and LIN28 have also been suggested to be oncogenes and may be implicated in the development of several cancers [21–26].
4002) The loss of miR-145 (miR-143/145 cluster) is observed in KRAS mutated pancreatic cancers, and therapeutic restoration of these miRNAs abrogates tumorigenesis [29,30].
4003) These data taken together suggest that miR-145 is a master regulator of iPSCs factors in ESCs and CSCs and may play an important role in inhibition of pancreatic cancer initiation, progression and EMT.Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling plays an important role in tumor angiogenesis.
4004) Studies using soluble VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 (inhibition of VEGFR-mediated signaling in a dominant-negative manner) or the VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors resulted in inhibition of tumor angiogenesis, growth and metastasis in PDAC mouse models [35–38].DCLK1 (formerly known as DCAMKL-1) is a putative intestinal and pancreatic stem cell marker and is upregulated in the stroma and epithelium of PDAC.
4005) In addition, it regulates several key oncogenes (c-MYC, KRAS and NOTCH1) and EMT.
4006) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
4009) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with a plasmid containing the firefly luciferase gene with a complementary miR-145 binding site at the 3' UTR.
4010) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of 3’ UTR containing binding site for let-7.
4011) These data indicate that DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7-dependent mechanism.Figure 4Figure 4DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7a.DCLK1 regulates miR-200 family genes and EMT in pancreatic cancerEMT is a highly conserved process, characterized by the phenotypic conversion of epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells [7].
4013) Recent studies have demonstrated that miR-200a, b and c (miR-200) are known to regulate EMT and angiogenesis [48].
4014) AsPC-1 cells were transfected separately with plasmids encoding the luciferase gene under the regulation of miRNA binding sites (three plasmids each containing binding sites for miR-200a, b or c) at its 3’ UTR.
4015) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with luciferase gene with VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 3’ UTR, treated with NPsiDCLK1 and subjected to luciferase activity measurement.
4016) We expect EGF signaling will also be downregulated following the knockdown of DCLK1.VEGF and its receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 have been demonstrated to play an important role in tumor vascular growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis [34].
4017) Though PDAC is not a grossly vascular tumor, they exhibit endothelial cell proliferation, one of the mechanisms that increase angiogenesis [38].
4020) For example, a single therapeutic miRNA may regulate hundreds of critical pathways that drive tumorigenesis; whereas, the introduction of a single DCLK1 targeted agent may induce multiple therapeutic miRNAs.
4021) These data provide the rationale for ongoing studies that investigate the role of DCLK1 in the regulation of miRNAs in cancer.It has been demonstrated that process of dedifferentiation and EMT may result in generation of stem cell-like properties.
4023) In this report, consistent with our previous studies, we observed downregulation of NOTCH1 in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 (Figure S2).All of these studies indicate that pluripotency, angiogenesis, EMT, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness are all involved in the complex interplay of cellular signaling, which are critical features of the tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer that play an important role in cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.
4024) The studies presented clearly implicate DCLK1 in the regulation of miR-143/145, miR-200, EMT, pluripotency, angiogenesis, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness.
4025) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
4026) This combined with its central regulatory role in stem cell-like processes, pluripotency factor regulation, EMT and angiogenesis makes it an ideal and novel target for therapy in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other solid tumors.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of c-MYC in pancreatic tumor xenografts.
4029) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D et al. (2005) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
4030) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4034) Ogawa T, Takayama K, Takakura N, Kitano S, Ueno H (2002) Anti-tumor angiogenesis therapy using soluble receptors: enhanced inhibition of tumor growth when soluble fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 is used with soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
4036) Mondalek FG, Ponnurangam S, Govind J, Houchen C, Anant S et al. (2010) Inhibition of angiogenesis- and inflammation-inducing factors in human colon cancer cells in vitro and in ovo by free and nanoparticle-encapsulated redox dye, DCPIP.
4038) Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW et al. (2008) An embryonic stem cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive human tumors.
4039) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with a plasmid containing the firefly luciferase gene with a complementary miR-145 binding site at the 3' UTR.
4040) Reports suggests that LIN28B, a pluripotency maintenance factor regulates miRNA let-7 and in turn let-7 regulates LIN28B (due to the presence of binding site in the 3’ UTR of LIN28B), which suggests a double negative feedback loop between LIN28 and let-7 [46,47].
4041) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of 3’ UTR containing binding site for let-7.
4042) AsPC-1 cells were transfected separately with plasmids encoding the luciferase gene under the regulation of miRNA binding sites (three plasmids each containing binding sites for miR-200a, b or c) at its 3’ UTR.
4043) A putative binding site for miR-200 was observed in the 3’ UTR of VEGFR1, and it was demonstrated that miR-200 negatively regulates VEGFR1 [48].
4044) Additionally, a recent study demonstrated that VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 has a binding site for miR-200b and based on luciferase-based reporter assay miR-200b regulates these angiogenic factors [49].
4046) Houchen1,4,5,*Chunming Liu, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractStem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers.
4047) The dysregulation of these processes is believed to play key roles in tumor initiation, progression, and metastasis, and is contributory to PDAC being the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in the US.
4048) The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic potential in PDAC.
4051) Specificity of DCLK1 post-transcriptional regulation of the downstream targets of miR-145, miR-200 and let-7a was accomplished utilizing a luciferase-based reporter assay.
4052) We conclude that DCLK1 plays a significant master regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis through the regulation of multiple tumor suppressor miRNAs and their downstream pro-tumorigenic pathways.
4054) A strong link between miRNA dysregulation and human cancer has been established [14].
4055) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
4056) Pluripotency transcription factors such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG and KLF4 form regulatory networks and influence a wide spectrum of downstream genes.
4058) In cancer, miR-145 is downregulated and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor properties.
4059) These data taken together suggest that miR-145 is a master regulator of iPSCs factors in ESCs and CSCs and may play an important role in inhibition of pancreatic cancer initiation, progression and EMT.Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling plays an important role in tumor angiogenesis.
4060) Studies using soluble VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 (inhibition of VEGFR-mediated signaling in a dominant-negative manner) or the VEGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors resulted in inhibition of tumor angiogenesis, growth and metastasis in PDAC mouse models [35–38].DCLK1 (formerly known as DCAMKL-1) is a putative intestinal and pancreatic stem cell marker and is upregulated in the stroma and epithelium of PDAC.
4061) It negatively regulates several tumor suppressor miRNAs and likely plays a key role in initiation and progression of solid tumor cancers [11,41].
4062) In addition, it regulates several key oncogenes (c-MYC, KRAS and NOTCH1) and EMT.
4063) In this report, following the knockdown of DCLK1 using nanoparticle-encapsulated siRNA (NPsiDCLK1) in tumor xenografted mice, we observed a significant increase in: (A) miR-143/145 cluster, which resulted in downregulation of key pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and NANOG); (B) let-7a, which resulted in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (C) miR-200a, b and c, which resulted in downregulation of EMT and angiogenic factors.
4064) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
4066) These data taken together demonstrate that inhibition of DCLK1 results in AsPC-1 tumor xenograft growth arrest.Figure 1Figure 1DCLK1 is essential for human pancreatic tumor xenograft growth.Knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of pluripotency factors in pancreatic tumor xenografts via miR-145It has been demonstrated that OCT4, SOX2, c-MYC, LIN28, NANOG and KLF4 are required for ESC self-renewal and pluripotency and are upregulated in some aggressive cancers and in CSCs [23–26,28].
4069) Additionally, we also observed a significant (>40%) downregulation of OCT4 (Figure 2E) and SOX2 (Figure 2F) at the mRNA level following the knockdown of DCLK1 in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 2Figure 2DCLK1 regulates pluripotency.DCLK1 post-transcriptionally regulates miR-145 in pancreatic cancermiR-145 has been shown to repress OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4, thereby repressing pluripotency and controlling differentiation [21].
4070) miR-145 is downregulated in various cancers and has been demonstrated to possess tumor suppressor and metastasis inhibitory properties [29,30].
4072) These data suggest that knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of miR-145 miRNA downstream targets in pancreatic cancer cells.
4073) Knockdown of DCLK1 resulted in increased expression of miR-143/145 cluster and downregulation of its downstream target KRAS (Figure 3D).
4075) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
4077) In pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant upregulation of let-7a (Figure 4A) and subsequent downregulation of its downstream target c-MYC (mRNA and protein) (Figure S1).
4078) Reports suggests that LIN28B, a pluripotency maintenance factor regulates miRNA let-7 and in turn let-7 regulates LIN28B (due to the presence of binding site in the 3’ UTR of LIN28B), which suggests a double negative feedback loop between LIN28 and let-7 [46,47].
4080) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of let-7-dependent luciferase activity (Figure 4B) indicating that NPsiDCLK1 regulates downstream targets of let-7 in pancreatic cancer cells.
4081) Based on real-time RT-PCR analysis of tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of LIN28B mRNA compared to NPsiSCR or control-treated tumors (Figure 4C).
4082) These data indicate that DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7-dependent mechanism.Figure 4Figure 4DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7a.DCLK1 regulates miR-200 family genes and EMT in pancreatic cancerEMT is a highly conserved process, characterized by the phenotypic conversion of epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells [7].
4083) Recent studies have demonstrated that miR-200a, b and c (miR-200) are known to regulate EMT and angiogenesis [48].
4084) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, a significant downregulation of ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG was observed following increased expression of pri-miR-200a in AsPC-1 cancer cells [11].
4087) AsPC-1 cells were transfected separately with plasmids encoding the luciferase gene under the regulation of miRNA binding sites (three plasmids each containing binding sites for miR-200a, b or c) at its 3’ UTR.
4090) These data taken together indicate that knockdown of DCLK1 inhibits EMT and invasion by regulating miR-200 in human pancreatic tumor xenografts and cancer cells.
4091) Similarly to our previous studies, following the knockdown of DCLK1, we also observed inhibition of NOTCH1 via miR-144 (Figure S2) in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 5Figure 5DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-200 and inhibits EMT and invasion.DCLK1 regulates angiogenic factors in PDACIt has been demonstrated that miR-200 inhibits lung adenocarcinoma invasion and metastasis by targeting VEGFR1.
4092) A putative binding site for miR-200 was observed in the 3’ UTR of VEGFR1, and it was demonstrated that miR-200 negatively regulates VEGFR1 [48].
4093) Additionally, a recent study demonstrated that VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 has a binding site for miR-200b and based on luciferase-based reporter assay miR-200b regulates these angiogenic factors [49].
4095) We observed a significant downregulation of VEGFR1 mRNA (Figure 6A), protein (Figure 6B and C – left panel) in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 compared to control and NPsiSCR treated-tumors.
4096) We also observed downregulation of VEGFR2 mRNA (Figure 6E) and protein (Figure 6C – right panel) in pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1.
4099) Dysregulation of miRNAs are quite common in many human cancers including PDAC.
4100) In many tumors, there is either overexpression of so-called oncogenic miRNAs (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or downregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
4104) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
4106) In this report, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating several tumor suppressor miRNAs and downstream oncogenic targets, DCLK1 inhibition results in upregulation of miRNAs that negatively regulate several key pluripotency and pro-angiogenic factors.
4107) These data support the notion that the DCLK1 is a central regulator of the tumor process.Repression of miR-143 and miR-145, two co-transcribed miRNAs located on human chromosome 5q, has been reported in pancreatic cancer.
4108) The miRNA restitution was confirmed in treated xenografts by significant upregulation of the corresponding miRNA and significant decreases in specific miRNA targets (KRAS2 and RREB1 for miR-143/145).
4109) Here, we observed downregulation of c-MYC and KRAS via let-7a in AsPC1 tumor xenografts following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure S1 and Figure 3D) (a similar mechanism was previously demonstrated in pancreatic cancer cells).Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is upregulated in various cancer including pancreatic [53].
4111) We expect EGF signaling will also be downregulated following the knockdown of DCLK1.VEGF and its receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 have been demonstrated to play an important role in tumor vascular growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis [34].
4112) Angiogenic factors are upregulated in various cancers such as colorectal, breast, renal, liver, and ovarian and have been correlated with poor prognosis.
4114) Our data suggest that by down-regulating DCLK1 expression in pancreatic cancer, we are directly inducing or facilitating upregulation of several endogenous miRNAs within the tumors.
4115) The role of DCLK1 in the regulation of pluripotency in a cancer context is novel and may present an exciting new target for anti-cancer based therapy.
4116) Using this candidate approach, we contend that endogenous upregulation of tumor suppressors may have an advantage over small molecule inhibitor-based approaches or even protein or miRNA replacement therapies.
4117) For example, a single therapeutic miRNA may regulate hundreds of critical pathways that drive tumorigenesis; whereas, the introduction of a single DCLK1 targeted agent may induce multiple therapeutic miRNAs.
4118) These data provide the rationale for ongoing studies that investigate the role of DCLK1 in the regulation of miRNAs in cancer.It has been demonstrated that process of dedifferentiation and EMT may result in generation of stem cell-like properties.
4119) In this report, consistent with our previous studies, we observed downregulation of NOTCH1 in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 (Figure S2).All of these studies indicate that pluripotency, angiogenesis, EMT, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness are all involved in the complex interplay of cellular signaling, which are critical features of the tumor microenvironment in pancreatic cancer that play an important role in cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.
4120) The studies presented clearly implicate DCLK1 in the regulation of miR-143/145, miR-200, EMT, pluripotency, angiogenesis, NOTCH1, and cancer stemness.
4121) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
4122) This combined with its central regulatory role in stem cell-like processes, pluripotency factor regulation, EMT and angiogenesis makes it an ideal and novel target for therapy in pancreatic cancer and perhaps other solid tumors.Go to:Supporting InformationFigure S1siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of c-MYC in pancreatic tumor xenografts.
4125) siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 in BxPC-3 results in decreased expression of DCLK1 mRNA (A), increased expression Let-7a, miR-144 and miR-143/145 (B), decreased expression of c-MYC and NOTCH1 (C), and decreased expression of NANOG, KLF4, OCT4 and SOX2 (D).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(576K, tif)Figure S4NPsiRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 downregulates EMT transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and angiogenic factors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 via miR-200 in BxPC-3 cells.
4126) Sureban SM, May R, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB, Lerner M et al. (2011) DCAMKL-1 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic cells through a miR-200a-dependent mechanism.
4135) Zhu H, Dougherty U, Robinson V, Mustafi R, Pekow J et al. (2011) EGFR signals downregulate tumor suppressors miR-143 and miR-145 in Western diet-promoted murine colon cancer: role of G1 regulators.
4136) Houchen1,4,5,*Chunming Liu, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractStem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers.
4137) In this report, following the knockdown of DCLK1 using nanoparticle-encapsulated siRNA (NPsiDCLK1) in tumor xenografted mice, we observed a significant increase in: (A) miR-143/145 cluster, which resulted in downregulation of key pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and NANOG); (B) let-7a, which resulted in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (C) miR-200a, b and c, which resulted in downregulation of EMT and angiogenic factors.
4138) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
4146) Sureban SM, May R, Mondalek FG, Qu D, Ponnurangam S et al. (2011) Nanoparticle-based delivery of siDCAMKL-1 increases microRNA-144 and inhibits colorectal cancer tumor growth via a Notch-1 dependent mechanism.
4162) Mondalek FG, Ponnurangam S, Govind J, Houchen C, Anant S et al. (2010) Inhibition of angiogenesis- and inflammation-inducing factors in human colon cancer cells in vitro and in ovo by free and nanoparticle-encapsulated redox dye, DCPIP.
4197) Mondalek FG, Ponnurangam S, Govind J, Houchen C, Anant S et al. (2010) Inhibition of angiogenesis- and inflammation-inducing factors in human colon cancer cells in vitro and in ovo by free and nanoparticle-encapsulated redox dye, DCPIP.
4210) Furthermore, Ras-responsive element binding protein 1 (RREB1) represses miR-143/miR-145 promoter activity, which indicates that repression is an early event in pancreatic cancer initiation and progression [29].
4212) In pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant upregulation of let-7a (Figure 4A) and subsequent downregulation of its downstream target c-MYC (mRNA and protein) (Figure S1).
4213) We observed a significant downregulation of VEGFR1 mRNA (Figure 6A), protein (Figure 6B and C – left panel) in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 compared to control and NPsiSCR treated-tumors.
4214) We also observed downregulation of VEGFR2 mRNA (Figure 6E) and protein (Figure 6C – right panel) in pancreatic tumor xenografts treated with NPsiDCLK1.
4215) Using this candidate approach, we contend that endogenous upregulation of tumor suppressors may have an advantage over small molecule inhibitor-based approaches or even protein or miRNA replacement therapies.
4216) A and B, A decreased expression of c-MYC mRNA (using quantitative real-time RT-PCR) and protein (using Western blot) was observed in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts following knockdown of DCLK1.
4217) C, Decreased expression of c-MYC protein (brown) was observed following the knockdown of DCLK1 by immunohistochemical analyses.
4220) Furthermore, Ras-responsive element binding protein 1 (RREB1) represses miR-143/miR-145 promoter activity, which indicates that repression is an early event in pancreatic cancer initiation and progression [29].
4222) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with a plasmid containing the firefly luciferase gene with a complementary miR-145 binding site at the 3' UTR.
4224) Reports suggests that LIN28B, a pluripotency maintenance factor regulates miRNA let-7 and in turn let-7 regulates LIN28B (due to the presence of binding site in the 3’ UTR of LIN28B), which suggests a double negative feedback loop between LIN28 and let-7 [46,47].
4225) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of 3’ UTR containing binding site for let-7.
4226) AsPC-1 cells were transfected separately with plasmids encoding the luciferase gene under the regulation of miRNA binding sites (three plasmids each containing binding sites for miR-200a, b or c) at its 3’ UTR.
4227) A putative binding site for miR-200 was observed in the 3’ UTR of VEGFR1, and it was demonstrated that miR-200 negatively regulates VEGFR1 [48].
4228) Additionally, a recent study demonstrated that VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 has a binding site for miR-200b and based on luciferase-based reporter assay miR-200b regulates these angiogenic factors [49].
4230) A strong link between miRNA dysregulation and human cancer has been established [14].
4232) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
4233) Detailed descriptions are provided in the Supplementary section of Materials and Methods (Text S1).Go to:ResultsRNA silencing of DCLK1 inhibits pancreatic cancer xenograft growthAsPC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice and tumors were allowed to develop for 30 days.
4234) These data taken together demonstrate that inhibition of DCLK1 results in AsPC-1 tumor xenograft growth arrest.Figure 1Figure 1DCLK1 is essential for human pancreatic tumor xenograft growth.Knockdown of DCLK1 results in downregulation of pluripotency factors in pancreatic tumor xenografts via miR-145It has been demonstrated that OCT4, SOX2, c-MYC, LIN28, NANOG and KLF4 are required for ESC self-renewal and pluripotency and are upregulated in some aggressive cancers and in CSCs [23–26,28].
4236) Previous studies have demonstrated that DCLK1 is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer tissues and co-localizes with SNAIL and SLUG.
4237) These data taken together indicate that knockdown of DCLK1 inhibits EMT and invasion by regulating miR-200 in human pancreatic tumor xenografts and cancer cells.
4238) Dysregulation of miRNAs are quite common in many human cancers including PDAC.
4239) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
4240) These data support the notion that the DCLK1 is a central regulator of the tumor process.Repression of miR-143 and miR-145, two co-transcribed miRNAs located on human chromosome 5q, has been reported in pancreatic cancer.
4241) Recently, it was reported that miR-145 inhibits cell proliferation of human lung adenocarcinoma by targeting EGFR, indicating that miR-145 is a tumor suppressor miRNA [55].
4242) Inhibition of multiple oncogenic pathways following the knockdown of DCLK1 was also observed in BxPC-3, human pancreatic cancer cell line (Figures S3 and S4).
4243) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
4244) Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW et al. (2007) Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer.
4245) Sureban SM, May R, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB, Lerner M et al. (2011) DCAMKL-1 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic cells through a miR-200a-dependent mechanism.
4248) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D et al. (2005) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
4249) Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H et al. (2004) Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
4252) Solorzano CC, Baker CH, Bruns CJ, Killion JJ, Ellis LM et al. (2001) Inhibition of growth and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer growing in nude mice by PTK 787/ZK222584, an inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases.
4253) Mondalek FG, Ponnurangam S, Govind J, Houchen C, Anant S et al. (2010) Inhibition of angiogenesis- and inflammation-inducing factors in human colon cancer cells in vitro and in ovo by free and nanoparticle-encapsulated redox dye, DCPIP.
4255) Ben-Porath I, Thomson MW, Carey VJ, Ge R, Bell GW et al. (2008) An embryonic stem cell-like gene expression signature in poorly differentiated aggressive human tumors.
4256) Additionally, we also observed a significant (>40%) downregulation of OCT4 (Figure 2E) and SOX2 (Figure 2F) at the mRNA level following the knockdown of DCLK1 in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.Figure 2Figure 2DCLK1 regulates pluripotency.DCLK1 post-transcriptionally regulates miR-145 in pancreatic cancermiR-145 has been shown to repress OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4, thereby repressing pluripotency and controlling differentiation [21].
4258) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of 3’ UTR containing binding site for let-7.
4259) Based on real-time RT-PCR analysis of tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of LIN28B mRNA compared to NPsiSCR or control-treated tumors (Figure 4C).
4260) We observed a significant downregulation of VEGFR1 mRNA (Figure 6A), protein (Figure 6B and C – left panel) in tumors treated with NPsiDCLK1 compared to control and NPsiSCR treated-tumors.
4262) These data taken together suggest that DCLK1 plays a central regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis, and the delivery of targeted siRNA based therapeutics that inhibit multiple pro-tumorigenic pathways under the control of DCLK1 may represent a simple straightforward approach to combat pancreatic cancer and perhaps other human solid tumor cancers.
4266) NPs were reconstituted in sterile normal saline and injected directly into the tumors.
4267) Inhibition of multiple oncogenic pathways following the knockdown of DCLK1 was also observed in BxPC-3, human pancreatic cancer cell line (Figures S3 and S4).
4272) Specificity of DCLK1 post-transcriptional regulation of the downstream targets of miR-145, miR-200 and let-7a was accomplished utilizing a luciferase-based reporter assay.
4276) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
4277) Pluripotency transcription factors such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG and KLF4 form regulatory networks and influence a wide spectrum of downstream genes.
4280) Additionally, KRAS and RREB1 are targets of miR-143/145, demonstrating a feed-forward mechanism that potentiates RAS signaling-mediated PDAC tumor progression [29].
4281) It has been recently demonstrated that ectopic expression of miR-143/145 results in repressed metastasis and increased adhesion of pancreatic cancer cells [30].
4287) In this report, following the knockdown of DCLK1 using nanoparticle-encapsulated siRNA (NPsiDCLK1) in tumor xenografted mice, we observed a significant increase in: (A) miR-143/145 cluster, which resulted in downregulation of key pluripotency markers (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and NANOG); (B) let-7a, which resulted in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (C) miR-200a, b and c, which resulted in downregulation of EMT and angiogenic factors.
4288) These data taken together suggest a central regulatory role of DCLK1 in pancreatic tumorigenesis.Go to:Materials and MethodsSmall interfering RNAsDCLK1 siRNA (siDCLK1) sequence targeting the coding region of DCLK1 (accession No. NM_004734) (GGGAGUGAGAACAAUCUACtt) and scrambled siRNAs (si-SCR) not matching any of the human genes were obtained (Ambion Inc, Austin, TX).Synthesis and characterization of DCLK1 siRNA NPsPoly(lactide-co-glycolide) acid nanoparticles (PLGA NPs) were synthesized using a double emulsion solvent evaporation technique as described earlier [11,44].
4291) NPs were reconstituted in sterile normal saline and injected directly into the tumors.
4293) Detailed descriptions are provided in the Supplementary section of Materials and Methods (Text S1).Go to:ResultsRNA silencing of DCLK1 inhibits pancreatic cancer xenograft growthAsPC-1 human pancreatic cancer cells were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of NOD/SCID mice and tumors were allowed to develop for 30 days.
4298) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with a plasmid containing the firefly luciferase gene with a complementary miR-145 binding site at the 3' UTR.
4301) With these data, we speculate that DCLK1 plays a role in post-transcriptional regulation of miR-143/145 cluster and thereby downregulates KRAS and RREB1 in pancreatic tumor xenografts.Figure 3Figure 3DCLK1 negatively regulates miR-143/145.Overall, these data taken together demonstrate a potential regulatory role for DCLK1 in the expression of iPSC factors in pancreatic cancers via miR-145 miRNA.DCLK1 regulates let-7a and its downstream target LIN28B in pancreatic cancerIn pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, we have previously demonstrated that DCLK1 negatively regulates miRNA let-7a.
4302) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with plasmid encoding firefly luciferase gene under the control of 3’ UTR containing binding site for let-7.
4304) These data indicate that DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7-dependent mechanism.Figure 4Figure 4DCLK1 regulates LIN28B via let-7a.DCLK1 regulates miR-200 family genes and EMT in pancreatic cancerEMT is a highly conserved process, characterized by the phenotypic conversion of epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells [7].
4305) Recent studies have demonstrated that miR-200a, b and c (miR-200) are known to regulate EMT and angiogenesis [48].
4306) Furthermore, we wanted to investigate the effect of DCLK1 knockdown on expression of miR-200b and c in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts.
4307) AsPC-1 cells were transfected separately with plasmids encoding the luciferase gene under the regulation of miRNA binding sites (three plasmids each containing binding sites for miR-200a, b or c) at its 3’ UTR.
4311) Additionally, a recent study demonstrated that VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 has a binding site for miR-200b and based on luciferase-based reporter assay miR-200b regulates these angiogenic factors [49].
4313) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with luciferase gene with VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 3’ UTR, treated with NPsiDCLK1 and subjected to luciferase activity measurement.
4316) DCLK1 regulates EMT in human pancreatic cancer cells via a miR-200a dependent mechanism [11] and is also a regulator of let-7a in pancreatic and colorectal cancer cells, which supports the concept that these miRNAs are relevant and novel targets in several solid tumor cancers [10,11,27,30,41].
4317) Reduced miR-143/145 expression is a common feature of many tumor types including colorectal carcinoma and PDAC [29,50,51].
4320) The miRNA restitution was confirmed in treated xenografts by significant upregulation of the corresponding miRNA and significant decreases in specific miRNA targets (KRAS2 and RREB1 for miR-143/145).
4321) Here, we observed downregulation of c-MYC and KRAS via let-7a in AsPC1 tumor xenografts following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure S1 and Figure 3D) (a similar mechanism was previously demonstrated in pancreatic cancer cells).Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is upregulated in various cancer including pancreatic [53].
4322) Recently, it was reported that miR-145 inhibits cell proliferation of human lung adenocarcinoma by targeting EGFR, indicating that miR-145 is a tumor suppressor miRNA [55].
4324) We expect EGF signaling will also be downregulated following the knockdown of DCLK1.VEGF and its receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 have been demonstrated to play an important role in tumor vascular growth, angiogenesis, and metastasis [34].
4325) Angiogenic factors are upregulated in various cancers such as colorectal, breast, renal, liver, and ovarian and have been correlated with poor prognosis.
4326) Though PDAC is not a grossly vascular tumor, they exhibit endothelial cell proliferation, one of the mechanisms that increase angiogenesis [38].
4327) Our data suggest that by down-regulating DCLK1 expression in pancreatic cancer, we are directly inducing or facilitating upregulation of several endogenous miRNAs within the tumors.
4328) Using this candidate approach, we contend that endogenous upregulation of tumor suppressors may have an advantage over small molecule inhibitor-based approaches or even protein or miRNA replacement therapies.
4331) It has been recently reported that poorly differentiated breast, glioma and bladder cancer cells express a pluripotent stem cell-like signature [58].
4333) A and B, A decreased expression of c-MYC mRNA (using quantitative real-time RT-PCR) and protein (using Western blot) was observed in AsPC-1 tumor xenografts following knockdown of DCLK1.
4334) C, Decreased expression of c-MYC protein (brown) was observed following the knockdown of DCLK1 by immunohistochemical analyses.
4337) siRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 in BxPC-3 results in decreased expression of DCLK1 mRNA (A), increased expression Let-7a, miR-144 and miR-143/145 (B), decreased expression of c-MYC and NOTCH1 (C), and decreased expression of NANOG, KLF4, OCT4 and SOX2 (D).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.(576K, tif)Figure S4NPsiRNA-mediated knockdown of DCLK1 downregulates EMT transcription factors ZEB1, ZEB2 and angiogenic factors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 via miR-200 in BxPC-3 cells.
4343) Sureban SM, May R, Lightfoot SA, Hoskins AB, Lerner M et al. (2011) DCAMKL-1 regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic cells through a miR-200a-dependent mechanism.
4344) Sureban SM, May R, Mondalek FG, Qu D, Ponnurangam S et al. (2011) Nanoparticle-based delivery of siDCAMKL-1 increases microRNA-144 and inhibits colorectal cancer tumor growth via a Notch-1 dependent mechanism.
4352) Ogawa T, Takayama K, Takakura N, Kitano S, Ueno H (2002) Anti-tumor angiogenesis therapy using soluble receptors: enhanced inhibition of tumor growth when soluble fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 is used with soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.
4353) Solorzano CC, Baker CH, Bruns CJ, Killion JJ, Ellis LM et al. (2001) Inhibition of growth and metastasis of human pancreatic cancer growing in nude mice by PTK 787/ZK222584, an inhibitor of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases.
4358) Pramanik D, Campbell NR, Karikari C, Chivukula R, Kent OA et al. (2011) Restitution of tumor suppressor microRNAs using a systemic nanovector inhibits pancreatic cancer growth in mice.
4361) Furthermore, Ras-responsive element binding protein 1 (RREB1) represses miR-143/miR-145 promoter activity, which indicates that repression is an early event in pancreatic cancer initiation and progression [29].
4365) Following the knockdown of DCLK1, we observed a significant downregulation of let-7-dependent luciferase activity (Figure 4B) indicating that NPsiDCLK1 regulates downstream targets of let-7 in pancreatic cancer cells.
4367) AsPC-1 cells were transfected with luciferase gene with VEGFR1 or VEGFR2 3’ UTR, treated with NPsiDCLK1 and subjected to luciferase activity measurement.
4370) Moreover, expression of these miRNAs inhibits proliferation and activates apoptosis of cancer cells in vitro and in vivo [29].
4372) The inhibition of invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells was observed in the invasion assay following the knockdown of DCLK1 (Figure 5E and F).Overexpression of NOTCH1 led to the induction of EMT phenotype by activation of mesenchymal cell markers such as ZEB1, CD44, EpCAM, and Hes-1 [59].
4373) Hermann PC, Huber SL, Herrler T, Aicher A, Ellwart JW et al. (2007) Distinct populations of cancer stem cells determine tumor growth and metastatic activity in human pancreatic cancer.
4374) The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic potential in PDAC.
4375) Consequently miRNAs have been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or tumor suppressors (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
4376) However, the precise regulatory features that tip the balance towards a cancer phenotype with respect to tumor suppressor versus oncogenic miRNA expression are poorly understood.Pluripotency is the ability of a cell to differentiate into any cell type and is a unique characteristic of embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
4377) The reprogramming factors OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4, c-MYC, and LIN28 have also been suggested to be oncogenes and may be implicated in the development of several cancers [21–26].
4378) In addition, it regulates several key oncogenes (c-MYC, KRAS and NOTCH1) and EMT.
4379) In many tumors, there is either overexpression of so-called oncogenic miRNAs (e.g., miR-155, miR-17−5p and miR-21) [15,16] or downregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs (e.g., miR-34, miR-15a, miR-16−1 and let-7) [17–20].
4380) In this report, we have demonstrated that in addition to regulating several tumor suppressor miRNAs and downstream oncogenic targets, DCLK1 inhibition results in upregulation of miRNAs that negatively regulate several key pluripotency and pro-angiogenic factors.
4381) Inhibition of multiple oncogenic pathways following the knockdown of DCLK1 was also observed in BxPC-3, human pancreatic cancer cell line (Figures S3 and S4).
4382) He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D et al. (2005) A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
4383) Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H et al. (2006) A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4385) Houchen1,4,5,*Chunming Liu, EditorAuthor information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.Go to:AbstractStem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers.
4386) We identify a microRNA exemplifying these attributes, miR-31, whose expression correlates inversely with metastasis in human breast cancer patients.
4389) The invasion-metastasis cascade, which leads to these growths, is a complex, multistep process involving the escape of neoplastic cells from a primary tumor (local invasion), intravasation into the systemic circulation, survival during transit through the vasculature, extravasation into the parenchyma of distant tissues, the establishment of micrometastases, and ultimately the outgrowth of macroscopic secondary tumors (colonization) (Fidler, 2003).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an evolutionarily conserved class of pleiotropically acting small RNAs that suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally via sequence-specific interactions with the 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of cognate mRNA targets (Bartel, 2009).
4390) More than 50% of miRNA-encoding loci reside in chromosomal regions altered during tumorigenesis (Calin et al., 2004), and expression profiling reveals characteristic miRNA signatures for many tumor types – including breast neoplasias – that predict disease status and clinical outcome (Calin and Croce, 2006).
4391) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4392) While non-metastatic tumor cells (HMLER, MCF7-Ras, and SUM-149) exhibited four-fold reduced miR-31, expression of this miRNA in metastatic SUM-159 and MDA-MB-231 cells was diminished by >100-fold (Figure 1A).Figure 1Figure 1miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastatic Ability in Breast Cell LinesRelative to its expression in normal murine mammary gland (NMuMG) cells, miR-31 levels in sub-lines derived from a single murine mammary tumor reflected their capacities to metastasize: miR-31 was reduced by two-fold in metastatic D2.1 and D2A1 cells, but not in non-aggressive D2.OR cells (Figure 1B).
4393) miR-31 levels were also inversely proportional to metastatic ability in four mouse mammary carcinoma sub-lines derived from a single spontaneously arising tumor: while miR-31 levels in non-aggressive 67NR cells were similar to those in NMuMG, miR-31 expression was progressively diminished upon acquisition of the capacity to invade locally (168FARN), to form micrometastases (4TO7), and to yield macroscopic metastases (4T1) (Figure 1B).
4394) Thus, miR-31 levels are specifically attenuated in aggressive breast cancer cells.miR-31 expression was heterogeneous in 4T1 cell primary mammary tumors; of note, the proportion of cells expressing miR-31 was 10-fold reduced in lung metastases relative to the fraction of miR-31-positive cells in the primary tumors from which they were derived (Figure 1C).
4397) Thus, we stably expressed miR-31 in metastatic MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells (“231 cells”).
4399) These effects were specifically attributable to the biological activities of miR-31, as equivalent overexpression of a control miRNA, miR-145, failed to influence invasion or motility (Figure 2A and data not shown).
4401) The consequences of miR-31 expression were not unique to 231 cells: miR-31 reduced invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance, yet did not affect proliferation, in aggressive SUM-159 human breast cancer cells (Figure S2).
4402) Thus, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were injected into the orthotopic site – the mammary fat pad – of mice.
4404) These changes were not accompanied by altered neovascularization (Figure S3B).Despite their ability to generate larger primary tumors, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were strikingly impaired in their capacity to seed lung metastases.
4407) As before, when injected orthotopically, miR-31-expressing cells formed large, well-encapsulated primary tumors and also reduced lung metastasis by five-fold (Figures S4B-S4D).
4408) Orthotopic injection of SUM-159 cells expressing miR-31 further corroborated our earlier findings: miR-31 enhanced primary tumor growth, yet miR-31-expressing tumors were more well-confined than control tumors (Figure S5).
4409) These observations indicated that the ability of miR-31-expressing cells to form larger, less invasive primary tumors, as well as to seed fewer metastases, is a specific consequence of the biological activities of miR-31.We determined if miR-31’s impact on metastasis was also attributable to effects on later steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade, independent of its influence on local invasion.
4412) This difference was not a consequence of an inability of miR-31-expressing cells to become lodged initially in the lung microvasculature, as equal numbers of miR-31-expressing and control cells were detected in the lungs 10 minutes and two hours post-injection (Figures 2G and S6A).
4413) These observations suggested that miR-31 regulates early post-intravasation events, such as intraluminal viability, extravasation, and/or initial survival in the lung parenchyma.Three months after tail vein injection, miR-31-expressing 231 cells generated 40-fold fewer lung metastases than did controls (Figure 2G).
4414) We also observed a dramatic effect on the size of eventually formed lesions: after three months, miR-31-expressing cells generated only small micrometastases while control cells formed macroscopic metastases; this occurred despite the fact that miR-31-expressing and control cells established comparably sized micrometastases one month post-injection (Figures 2G and S6B).
4416) The latter are expression constructs that carry miRNA recognition motifs in their 3’ UTR that bind and thus titer miRNAs (Ebert et al., 2007).
4419) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4421) Primary tumors derived from miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were poorly encapsulated and locally invasive, while control MCF7-Ras tumors appeared well-confined and non-invasive (Figures 3D and 3E).
4422) Again, neovascularization did not differ (Figure S10B).Strikingly, miR-31 sponge-expressing MCF7-Ras cells metastasized to the lungs in significant numbers, while control tumor-bearing host lungs were largely devoid of tumor cells; cells with impaired miR-31 activity formed 10-fold more lesions than did controls (Figure 3F).
4424) Within one day, miR-31 inhibition enhanced cell number in the lungs by six-fold; similarly, at later times after injection, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were 10-fold more prevalent in the lungs than were controls (Figure 3G).
4425) The differing metastatic abilities of control and miR-31 sponge-expressing cells did not arise due to failure of control cells to become lodged initially in the lung vasculature, as equal numbers of cells from each cohort were present 10 minutes after injection (Figures 3G and S11).Suppression of miR-31 also affected lesion size four months after tail vein injection: whereas control cells formed only small micrometastases, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells produced macroscopic metastases (Figure 3G).
4426) Together, these data extended and reinforced our ectopic expression studies by demonstrating that miR-31 affects local invasion, early post-intravasation events, and metastatic colonization.miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesmiR-31’s ability to impede multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade might derive from its ability to pleiotropically regulate genes involved in diverse aspects of metastatic dissemination.
4428) In the case of RhoA, whose UTR contains two miR-31 sites separated by 152 nucleotides, mutation of either motif abolished miR-31-responsiveness (Figure 4B), suggesting functional interaction between the sites (Grimson et al., 2007).Figure 4Figure 4miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesEndogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA protein levels were assayed in miR-31-expressing 231 cells.
4429) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4430) To do so, we constructed a miR-31 target signature based on coordinate differential expression of these six genes.
4431) Within this cohort, high expression of the miR-31 target signature was associated with metastasis, as well as poor survival, relative to signature-negative tumors; five-year survival among patients negative for the target signature was 90%, while >35% of target signature-positive patients succumbed to their disease over this interval (Figures 5A and 5B).
4435) Expression of the six targets failed to enhance the invasion or motility of control 231 cells (Figures 5E and S13C).We evaluated if re-expression of any of the six targets rescued miR-31’s effects on anoikis.
4436) Thus, we stably re-expressed miRNA-resistant RhoA in 231 cells that already had been infected with either miR-31 or control vector (Figures S14A and S14B).
4437) RhoA did not affect proliferation in vitro, but did abrogate miR-31-imposed invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance defects (Figures S14C-S14F).To ascertain if restored RhoA levels reversed in vivo metastasis phenotypes ascribable to miR-31, we orthotopically injected mice with 231 cells expressing combinations of miR-31, RhoA, and control vectors.
4438) In consonance with our earlier findings, control 231 primary tumors were locally invasive, while miR-31-expressing tumors were non-invasive (Figures 6B and 6C).
4439) In control 231 cells, ectopic RhoA failed to exacerbate the extent of local invasion; in contrast, RhoA abolished the previously encapsulated appearance of miR-31-expressing tumors and enabled invasion into surrounding normal tissue (Figures 6B and 6C).Figure 6Figure 6Re-Expression of RhoA Partially Reverses miR-31-Imposed Metastasis Defects in vivoRe-expression of RhoA restored lung metastasis in miR-31-expressing 231 cells to 75% of control cell levels, while RhoA failed to enhance metastasis in control 231 cells (Figure 6D).
4441) The observed magnitude of rescue is surprising, as RhoA is only one member of a larger cohort of metastasis-relevant genes repressed by miR-31.By intravenously injecting mice with 231 cells expressing miR-31 and/or RhoA, we gauged if RhoA-mediated reversal of miR-31-imposed metastasis defects was solely attributable to effects on local invasion.
4442) While expression of miR-31 and/or RhoA failed to affect the initial lodging of tumor cells in the lung vasculature, the number of cells that persisted in the lungs differed within one day of injection (Figures 6E and S15).
4443) While expression of RhoA in control 231 cells failed to enhance metastasis, RhoA restored the number of lung metastases to 60% of control cell levels in miR-31-expressing cells; however, RhoA did not facilitate the formation of macroscopic metastases in cells with ectopic miR-31 (Figure 6E).Together, these data indicated that miR-31’s ability to inhibit metastasis is attributable, in significant part, to its capacity to inhibit RhoA.
4444) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4445) Relative to grade-matched estrogen receptor (ER)+ tumors, which are associated with more favorable disease outcome (Sørlie et al., 2001), basal-like tumors exhibited 40% reduced miR-31; no difference in miR-31 levels was observed between ER+ and HER2+ tumors (Figure S16).When these 56 tumors were stratified based on clinical progression, we found that miR-31 expression was diminished in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when compared to normal breast tissue and primary tumors that did not recur; moreover, low miR-31 levels correlated strongly with reduced distant disease-free survival relative to tumors with high miR-31 (Figures 7A and 7B).
4446) Similarly, within this cohort of tumors, high RhoA expression was associated with an increased incidence of distant metastasis (Figure S17).Figure 7Figure 7miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsThe association of low miR-31 levels with metastasis persisted independent of both tumor grade and molecular subtype (Figure S18).
4447) Thus, miR-31 may represent a marker for metastasis in a variety of breast cancer subtypes; however, its utility as a prognostic indicator will depend on extension of these initial observations.We next assessed the heterogeneity of miR-31 expression in human primary breast tumors, as well as distant metastases arising in the same patients.
4448) miR-31 was expressed in 65% of the cells in these primary tumors; however, miR-31 was detected in only 12–30% of cells in patient-matched distant metastases (Figure 7C).
4449) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4450) RDX and RhoA were expressed in 60–75% of cells in the primary tumors examined, while ITGA5 was detected in >80% of cells (Figure 7D).
4451) Distant metastases were more homogeneous for the expression of RDX and RhoA than the primary tumors from which they were derived, as >90% of cells in the metastases expressed RDX and RhoA (Figure 7D).
4454) Similar associations have been described in human tumors for ITGA5 (Sanchez-Carbayo et al., 2006) and the RDX family (McClatchey, 2003).Re-expression of several individual miR-31 targets largely reversed miR-31-imposed defects in vitro.
4455) This may indicate that certain miR-31 effectors activate one another; however, ectopic ITGA5, RDX, or RhoA did not induce the expression of other miR-31 targets (data not shown).
4456) RT-PCR-based detection of mature miR-31 and 5S rRNA was achieved with a mirVana miRNA Detection Kit and gene-specific primers (Ambion).miRNA in situ HybridizationmiRNA expression was assessed from paraffin sections using a protocol adapted from Silahtaroglu et al. (2007).
4457) Tumors were considered miR-31-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of miR-31 resided in the top or bottom 30% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.
4458) Tumors were considered target signature-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of multiple of the six miR-31 targets herein identified resided in the top or bottom 15% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.ImmunohistochemistryDetection of Ki-67 (Pharmingen), MECA-32 (U. of Iowa), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), RDX (Santa Cruz), or RhoA (Abcam) was performed on 5 μm paraffin sections using the indicated antibodies, Vectastain Elite ABC kits (Vector), and ImmPACT DAB Substrate (Vector).Statistical AnalysesData are presented as mean ± s.e.m.
4459) [PubMed]Blenkiron C, Goldstein LD, Thorne NP, Spiteri I, Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Barbosa-Morais NL, Teschendorff AE, Green AR, Ellis IO, et al. MicroRNA expression profiling of human breast cancer identifies new markers of tumor subtype.
4460) [PubMed]Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Liu CG, Veronese A, Spizzo R, Sabbioni S, Magri E, Pedriali M, Fabbri M, Campiglio M, et al. MicroRNA gene expression deregulation in human breast cancer.
4463) [PMC free article] [PubMed]van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van't Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
4464) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4465) MicroRNA miR-21 overexpression in human breast cancer is associated with advanced clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and patient poor prognosis.
4466) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4467) The invasion-metastasis cascade, which leads to these growths, is a complex, multistep process involving the escape of neoplastic cells from a primary tumor (local invasion), intravasation into the systemic circulation, survival during transit through the vasculature, extravasation into the parenchyma of distant tissues, the establishment of micrometastases, and ultimately the outgrowth of macroscopic secondary tumors (colonization) (Fidler, 2003).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an evolutionarily conserved class of pleiotropically acting small RNAs that suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally via sequence-specific interactions with the 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of cognate mRNA targets (Bartel, 2009).
4468) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4470) Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) revealed that these targets included a disproportionately large number of genes encoding proteins with roles in motility-related processes, such as cell adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, and cell polarity (data not shown).Guided by this Gene Ontology analysis, we cloned the 3’ UTRs of 16 putative miR-31 targets from these overrepresented categories, including several implicated in tumor invasion (Sahai and Marshall, 2002; McClatchey, 2003), into a luciferase construct.
4472) miR-31 did not affect CXCL12 mRNA levels – a computationally predicted miR-31 target found not to be regulated by this miRNA – in either cell type (Figures 4A and 4D).
4473) To do so, we constructed a miR-31 target signature based on coordinate differential expression of these six genes.
4474) Within this cohort, high expression of the miR-31 target signature was associated with metastasis, as well as poor survival, relative to signature-negative tumors; five-year survival among patients negative for the target signature was 90%, while >35% of target signature-positive patients succumbed to their disease over this interval (Figures 5A and 5B).
4475) Thus, coordinate repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with more favorable outcome in clinical breast tumors.Figure 5Figure 5Repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA Underlies miR-31-Dependent Phenotypes in vitroTo assess the functional contributions of these miR-31 targets to aggressive phenotypes, we first examined if their inhibition affected the invasion or motility of 231 cells.
4476) Transfection with siRNAs potently reduced target protein levels without affecting cell viability (Figures S12A and S12B).
4479) Expression of the six targets failed to enhance the invasion or motility of control 231 cells (Figures 5E and S13C).We evaluated if re-expression of any of the six targets rescued miR-31’s effects on anoikis.
4481) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4483) Similar associations have been described in human tumors for ITGA5 (Sanchez-Carbayo et al., 2006) and the RDX family (McClatchey, 2003).Re-expression of several individual miR-31 targets largely reversed miR-31-imposed defects in vitro.
4484) This may indicate that certain miR-31 effectors activate one another; however, ectopic ITGA5, RDX, or RhoA did not induce the expression of other miR-31 targets (data not shown).
4485) Briefly, after a four hour pre-hybridization, a 5’ FITC-labeled miRCURY LNA probe targeting miR-31 (Exiqon) was hybridized to proteinase K-treated 10 μm sections at 55°C for 12 hours.
4486) Lysates were collected 24 hours post-transfection, and Renilla and firefly luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega).ImmunoblotsLysates were resolved by electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against β-actin (Santa Cruz), Fzd3 (Abcam), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), MMP16 (Abcam), RDX (Cell Signaling), or RhoA (Santa Cruz).miR-31 Target SignatureExpression profiling of 295 human breast tumors (van de Vijver et al., 2002) was used to categorize tumors as miR-31 target signature-positive or -negative.
4487) Tumors were considered target signature-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of multiple of the six miR-31 targets herein identified resided in the top or bottom 15% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.ImmunohistochemistryDetection of Ki-67 (Pharmingen), MECA-32 (U. of Iowa), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), RDX (Santa Cruz), or RhoA (Abcam) was performed on 5 μm paraffin sections using the indicated antibodies, Vectastain Elite ABC kits (Vector), and ImmPACT DAB Substrate (Vector).Statistical AnalysesData are presented as mean ± s.e.m.
4488) MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions.
4491) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4492) MicroRNA-21 targets tumor suppressor genes in invasion and metastasis.
4493) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4495) These phenotypes do not involve confounding influences on primary tumor development and are specifically attributable to miR-31-mediated inhibition of several steps of metastasis, including local invasion, extravasation or initial survival at a distant site, and metastatic colonization.
4496) The invasion-metastasis cascade, which leads to these growths, is a complex, multistep process involving the escape of neoplastic cells from a primary tumor (local invasion), intravasation into the systemic circulation, survival during transit through the vasculature, extravasation into the parenchyma of distant tissues, the establishment of micrometastases, and ultimately the outgrowth of macroscopic secondary tumors (colonization) (Fidler, 2003).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an evolutionarily conserved class of pleiotropically acting small RNAs that suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally via sequence-specific interactions with the 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of cognate mRNA targets (Bartel, 2009).
4497) In mammalian cells, miRNAs effect gene silencing via both translational inhibition and mRNA degradation; an individual miRNA is capable of regulating dozens of distinct mRNAs, and together the >650 human miRNAs are believed to modulate greater than one-third of the mRNA species encoded in the genome (Bartel, 2009).A central role for miRNAs in the establishment and progression of human tumors has begun to emerge.
4498) More than 50% of miRNA-encoding loci reside in chromosomal regions altered during tumorigenesis (Calin et al., 2004), and expression profiling reveals characteristic miRNA signatures for many tumor types – including breast neoplasias – that predict disease status and clinical outcome (Calin and Croce, 2006).
4499) In addition, miRNAs have been identified that function as classical oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (Ventura and Jacks, 2009), as well as a limited number that act at late stages of tumor progression (Ma et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2008; Asangani et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).The extent to which miRNAs specifically affect metastasis remains unclear, as all the miRNAs reported to affect metastasis also exert potentially confounding influences on primary tumor development, apoptosis, and/or cell proliferation (Voorhoeve et al., 2006; Sathyan et al., 2007; Ma et al., 2007; Si et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Kondo et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).
4500) Moreover, a role for miRNAs in steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade subsequent to local invasion has not been described.The pleiotropic nature of gene regulation exhibited by miRNAs led us to hypothesize that certain miRNAs might be endowed with a capacity to function as crucial modulators of tumor metastasis.
4501) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4502) These studies did not stratify patients based on metastasis status.Expression of the 10 candidate miRNAs was assayed in 15 human and mouse mammary cell lines, which included normal epithelial cells, tumorigenic but non-metastatic cells, and metastatic tumor cells (Table S2).
4503) While non-metastatic tumor cells (HMLER, MCF7-Ras, and SUM-149) exhibited four-fold reduced miR-31, expression of this miRNA in metastatic SUM-159 and MDA-MB-231 cells was diminished by >100-fold (Figure 1A).Figure 1Figure 1miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastatic Ability in Breast Cell LinesRelative to its expression in normal murine mammary gland (NMuMG) cells, miR-31 levels in sub-lines derived from a single murine mammary tumor reflected their capacities to metastasize: miR-31 was reduced by two-fold in metastatic D2.1 and D2A1 cells, but not in non-aggressive D2.OR cells (Figure 1B).
4504) miR-31 levels were also inversely proportional to metastatic ability in four mouse mammary carcinoma sub-lines derived from a single spontaneously arising tumor: while miR-31 levels in non-aggressive 67NR cells were similar to those in NMuMG, miR-31 expression was progressively diminished upon acquisition of the capacity to invade locally (168FARN), to form micrometastases (4TO7), and to yield macroscopic metastases (4T1) (Figure 1B).
4505) Thus, miR-31 levels are specifically attenuated in aggressive breast cancer cells.miR-31 expression was heterogeneous in 4T1 cell primary mammary tumors; of note, the proportion of cells expressing miR-31 was 10-fold reduced in lung metastases relative to the fraction of miR-31-positive cells in the primary tumors from which they were derived (Figure 1C).
4509) These changes were not accompanied by altered neovascularization (Figure S3B).Despite their ability to generate larger primary tumors, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were strikingly impaired in their capacity to seed lung metastases.
4510) As before, when injected orthotopically, miR-31-expressing cells formed large, well-encapsulated primary tumors and also reduced lung metastasis by five-fold (Figures S4B-S4D).
4511) Orthotopic injection of SUM-159 cells expressing miR-31 further corroborated our earlier findings: miR-31 enhanced primary tumor growth, yet miR-31-expressing tumors were more well-confined than control tumors (Figure S5).
4512) These observations indicated that the ability of miR-31-expressing cells to form larger, less invasive primary tumors, as well as to seed fewer metastases, is a specific consequence of the biological activities of miR-31.We determined if miR-31’s impact on metastasis was also attributable to effects on later steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade, independent of its influence on local invasion.
4513) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4514) Collectively, these data indicated that sustained miR-31 activity is necessary to prevent the acquisition of aggressive traits by both tumor cells and untransformed breast epithelial cells.Inhibition of miR-31 Promotes Metastasis in vivoWe exploited our ability to stably inhibit miRNAs in order to assess whether miR-31 activity is required to prevent metastasis in vivo.
4516) Primary tumors derived from miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were poorly encapsulated and locally invasive, while control MCF7-Ras tumors appeared well-confined and non-invasive (Figures 3D and 3E).
4517) Again, neovascularization did not differ (Figure S10B).Strikingly, miR-31 sponge-expressing MCF7-Ras cells metastasized to the lungs in significant numbers, while control tumor-bearing host lungs were largely devoid of tumor cells; cells with impaired miR-31 activity formed 10-fold more lesions than did controls (Figure 3F).
4518) Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) revealed that these targets included a disproportionately large number of genes encoding proteins with roles in motility-related processes, such as cell adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, and cell polarity (data not shown).Guided by this Gene Ontology analysis, we cloned the 3’ UTRs of 16 putative miR-31 targets from these overrepresented categories, including several implicated in tumor invasion (Sahai and Marshall, 2002; McClatchey, 2003), into a luciferase construct.
4519) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4520) Within this cohort, high expression of the miR-31 target signature was associated with metastasis, as well as poor survival, relative to signature-negative tumors; five-year survival among patients negative for the target signature was 90%, while >35% of target signature-positive patients succumbed to their disease over this interval (Figures 5A and 5B).
4521) Thus, coordinate repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with more favorable outcome in clinical breast tumors.Figure 5Figure 5Repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA Underlies miR-31-Dependent Phenotypes in vitroTo assess the functional contributions of these miR-31 targets to aggressive phenotypes, we first examined if their inhibition affected the invasion or motility of 231 cells.
4523) RhoA initially augmented primary tumor growth in the presence of ectopic miR-31, but failed to do so in control 231 cells (Figure 6A).
4524) In consonance with our earlier findings, control 231 primary tumors were locally invasive, while miR-31-expressing tumors were non-invasive (Figures 6B and 6C).
4525) In control 231 cells, ectopic RhoA failed to exacerbate the extent of local invasion; in contrast, RhoA abolished the previously encapsulated appearance of miR-31-expressing tumors and enabled invasion into surrounding normal tissue (Figures 6B and 6C).Figure 6Figure 6Re-Expression of RhoA Partially Reverses miR-31-Imposed Metastasis Defects in vivoRe-expression of RhoA restored lung metastasis in miR-31-expressing 231 cells to 75% of control cell levels, while RhoA failed to enhance metastasis in control 231 cells (Figure 6D).
4526) While expression of miR-31 and/or RhoA failed to affect the initial lodging of tumor cells in the lung vasculature, the number of cells that persisted in the lungs differed within one day of injection (Figures 6E and S15).
4527) Relative to grade-matched estrogen receptor (ER)+ tumors, which are associated with more favorable disease outcome (Sørlie et al., 2001), basal-like tumors exhibited 40% reduced miR-31; no difference in miR-31 levels was observed between ER+ and HER2+ tumors (Figure S16).When these 56 tumors were stratified based on clinical progression, we found that miR-31 expression was diminished in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when compared to normal breast tissue and primary tumors that did not recur; moreover, low miR-31 levels correlated strongly with reduced distant disease-free survival relative to tumors with high miR-31 (Figures 7A and 7B).
4528) Similarly, within this cohort of tumors, high RhoA expression was associated with an increased incidence of distant metastasis (Figure S17).Figure 7Figure 7miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsThe association of low miR-31 levels with metastasis persisted independent of both tumor grade and molecular subtype (Figure S18).
4529) Thus, miR-31 may represent a marker for metastasis in a variety of breast cancer subtypes; however, its utility as a prognostic indicator will depend on extension of these initial observations.We next assessed the heterogeneity of miR-31 expression in human primary breast tumors, as well as distant metastases arising in the same patients.
4530) miR-31 was expressed in 65% of the cells in these primary tumors; however, miR-31 was detected in only 12–30% of cells in patient-matched distant metastases (Figure 7C).
4531) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4532) RDX and RhoA were expressed in 60–75% of cells in the primary tumors examined, while ITGA5 was detected in >80% of cells (Figure 7D).
4533) Distant metastases were more homogeneous for the expression of RDX and RhoA than the primary tumors from which they were derived, as >90% of cells in the metastases expressed RDX and RhoA (Figure 7D).
4535) Moreover, miR-31 levels correlate inversely with metastatic recurrence in a cohort of human breast tumors, a preliminary association that appears to persist independent of both tumor grade and subtype.Genome-wide studies have described miR-31 downregulation or deletion of the miR-31 genomic locus in human breast cancers (Calin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2008).
4539) This suggests one putative mechanism by which the invasion-metastasis cascade could be initiated very early during the course of tumor progression, a phenomenon that has recently been observed in clinical breast tumors (Hüsemann et al., 2008).Given the capacity of miR-31 to enhance primary tumor growth, an oncogenic role for this miRNA (mechanistically independent of its metastasis-suppressive functions) cannot be formally excluded.
4540) Such duality of action is not unprecedented (Massagué, 2008), and is consistent with notions that metastasis- and tumorigenesis-enabling attributes can be biologically distinct and acquired via independent selective pressures during malignant progression.Previous studies have described effects of specific miRNAs on an early stage of the invasion-metastasis cascade – local invasion.
4542) miR-31-imposed suppression of RhoA partially explains the effects of this miRNA on local invasion and early post-intravasation events; however, the mechanisms by which miR-31 suppresses metastatic colonization remain unresolved.The levels of several functionally relevant effectors of miR-31 correlate with disease progression in human tumors.
4543) Similar associations have been described in human tumors for ITGA5 (Sanchez-Carbayo et al., 2006) and the RDX family (McClatchey, 2003).Re-expression of several individual miR-31 targets largely reversed miR-31-imposed defects in vitro.
4544) For example, cell lines accumulate genetic changes in culture, while xenografts fail to recapitulate species-specific interactions between tumor cells and their stroma.
4545) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4546) Our data suggest that the loss of a single gene product can facilitate the completion of multiple distinct steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade; this pleiotropic action may help to explain how tumor cells can accumulate enough genetic and epigenetic aberrations over the course of a human lifespan to overcome the numerous barriers that normally operate to prevent metastasis.
4550) Tumors were considered miR-31-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of miR-31 resided in the top or bottom 30% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.
4552) For spontaneous metastasis assays, age-matched female NOD/SCID mice (propagated on-site) were bilaterally injected into the mammary fat pad with the indicated number of tumor cells in 1:2 Matrigel (BD Biosciences) plus normal growth media.
4553) Lysates were collected 24 hours post-transfection, and Renilla and firefly luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega).ImmunoblotsLysates were resolved by electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against β-actin (Santa Cruz), Fzd3 (Abcam), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), MMP16 (Abcam), RDX (Cell Signaling), or RhoA (Santa Cruz).miR-31 Target SignatureExpression profiling of 295 human breast tumors (van de Vijver et al., 2002) was used to categorize tumors as miR-31 target signature-positive or -negative.
4554) Tumors were considered target signature-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of multiple of the six miR-31 targets herein identified resided in the top or bottom 15% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.ImmunohistochemistryDetection of Ki-67 (Pharmingen), MECA-32 (U. of Iowa), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), RDX (Santa Cruz), or RhoA (Abcam) was performed on 5 μm paraffin sections using the indicated antibodies, Vectastain Elite ABC kits (Vector), and ImmPACT DAB Substrate (Vector).Statistical AnalysesData are presented as mean ± s.e.m.
4555) MicroRNA-21 post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer.
4557) [PubMed]Blenkiron C, Goldstein LD, Thorne NP, Spiteri I, Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Barbosa-Morais NL, Teschendorff AE, Green AR, Ellis IO, et al. MicroRNA expression profiling of human breast cancer identifies new markers of tumor subtype.
4558) Distinct organ-specific metastatic potential of individual breast cancer cells and primary tumors.
4562) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4563) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4564) MicroRNA-21 targets tumor suppressor genes in invasion and metastasis.
4565) We identify a microRNA exemplifying these attributes, miR-31, whose expression correlates inversely with metastasis in human breast cancer patients.
4567) These findings indicate that miR-31 uses multiple mechanisms to oppose metastasis.Go to:INTRODUCTIONMetastases account for 90% of human cancer deaths (Gupta and Massagué, 2006), yet our understanding of the molecular circuitry that governs metastatic dissemination remains fragmentary.
4568) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4569) The levels of a single miRNA, miR-31, were specifically attenuated in aggressive human breast cancer cells when compared to primary normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs).
4570) Thus, miR-31 levels are specifically attenuated in aggressive breast cancer cells.miR-31 expression was heterogeneous in 4T1 cell primary mammary tumors; of note, the proportion of cells expressing miR-31 was 10-fold reduced in lung metastases relative to the fraction of miR-31-positive cells in the primary tumors from which they were derived (Figure 1C).
4571) Thus, we stably expressed miR-31 in metastatic MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells (“231 cells”).
4572) The consequences of miR-31 expression were not unique to 231 cells: miR-31 reduced invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance, yet did not affect proliferation, in aggressive SUM-159 human breast cancer cells (Figure S2).
4574) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4575) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4576) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4578) Thus, miR-31 may represent a marker for metastasis in a variety of breast cancer subtypes; however, its utility as a prognostic indicator will depend on extension of these initial observations.We next assessed the heterogeneity of miR-31 expression in human primary breast tumors, as well as distant metastases arising in the same patients.
4579) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4580) Moreover, miR-31 levels correlate inversely with metastatic recurrence in a cohort of human breast tumors, a preliminary association that appears to persist independent of both tumor grade and subtype.Genome-wide studies have described miR-31 downregulation or deletion of the miR-31 genomic locus in human breast cancers (Calin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2008).
4581) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4582) MicroRNA-21 post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer.
4583) [PubMed]Blenkiron C, Goldstein LD, Thorne NP, Spiteri I, Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Barbosa-Morais NL, Teschendorff AE, Green AR, Ellis IO, et al. MicroRNA expression profiling of human breast cancer identifies new markers of tumor subtype.
4584) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
4587) The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the 'seed and soil' hypothesis revisited.
4589) [PubMed]Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Liu CG, Veronese A, Spizzo R, Sabbioni S, Magri E, Pedriali M, Fabbri M, Campiglio M, et al. MicroRNA gene expression deregulation in human breast cancer.
4590) miR-206 Expression is down-regulated in estrogen receptor α-positive human breast cancer.
4595) Merlin and ERM proteins: unappreciated roles in cancer development?
4596) Distinct organ-specific metastatic potential of individual breast cancer cells and primary tumors.
4601) [PMC free article] [PubMed]van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van't Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
4603) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4604) MicroRNA miR-21 overexpression in human breast cancer is associated with advanced clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and patient poor prognosis.
4605) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Zhang L, Huang J, Yang N, Greshock J, Megraw MS, Giannakakis A, Liang S, Naylor TL, Barchetti A, Ward MR, et al. microRNAs exhibit high frequency genomic alterations in human cancer.
4606) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4608) The invasion-metastasis cascade, which leads to these growths, is a complex, multistep process involving the escape of neoplastic cells from a primary tumor (local invasion), intravasation into the systemic circulation, survival during transit through the vasculature, extravasation into the parenchyma of distant tissues, the establishment of micrometastases, and ultimately the outgrowth of macroscopic secondary tumors (colonization) (Fidler, 2003).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an evolutionarily conserved class of pleiotropically acting small RNAs that suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally via sequence-specific interactions with the 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of cognate mRNA targets (Bartel, 2009).
4609) In mammalian cells, miRNAs effect gene silencing via both translational inhibition and mRNA degradation; an individual miRNA is capable of regulating dozens of distinct mRNAs, and together the >650 human miRNAs are believed to modulate greater than one-third of the mRNA species encoded in the genome (Bartel, 2009).A central role for miRNAs in the establishment and progression of human tumors has begun to emerge.
4610) More than 50% of miRNA-encoding loci reside in chromosomal regions altered during tumorigenesis (Calin et al., 2004), and expression profiling reveals characteristic miRNA signatures for many tumor types – including breast neoplasias – that predict disease status and clinical outcome (Calin and Croce, 2006).
4611) In addition, miRNAs have been identified that function as classical oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (Ventura and Jacks, 2009), as well as a limited number that act at late stages of tumor progression (Ma et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2008; Asangani et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).The extent to which miRNAs specifically affect metastasis remains unclear, as all the miRNAs reported to affect metastasis also exert potentially confounding influences on primary tumor development, apoptosis, and/or cell proliferation (Voorhoeve et al., 2006; Sathyan et al., 2007; Ma et al., 2007; Si et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Kondo et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).
4612) Moreover, a role for miRNAs in steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade subsequent to local invasion has not been described.The pleiotropic nature of gene regulation exhibited by miRNAs led us to hypothesize that certain miRNAs might be endowed with a capacity to function as crucial modulators of tumor metastasis.
4613) Thus, miR-31 levels are specifically attenuated in aggressive breast cancer cells.miR-31 expression was heterogeneous in 4T1 cell primary mammary tumors; of note, the proportion of cells expressing miR-31 was 10-fold reduced in lung metastases relative to the fraction of miR-31-positive cells in the primary tumors from which they were derived (Figure 1C).
4614) These changes were not accompanied by altered neovascularization (Figure S3B).Despite their ability to generate larger primary tumors, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were strikingly impaired in their capacity to seed lung metastases.
4615) These observations suggested that miR-31 regulates early post-intravasation events, such as intraluminal viability, extravasation, and/or initial survival in the lung parenchyma.Three months after tail vein injection, miR-31-expressing 231 cells generated 40-fold fewer lung metastases than did controls (Figure 2G).
4616) We also observed a dramatic effect on the size of eventually formed lesions: after three months, miR-31-expressing cells generated only small micrometastases while control cells formed macroscopic metastases; this occurred despite the fact that miR-31-expressing and control cells established comparably sized micrometastases one month post-injection (Figures 2G and S6B).
4617) Together, these data extended and reinforced our ectopic expression studies by demonstrating that miR-31 affects local invasion, early post-intravasation events, and metastatic colonization.miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesmiR-31’s ability to impede multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade might derive from its ability to pleiotropically regulate genes involved in diverse aspects of metastatic dissemination.
4618) Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) revealed that these targets included a disproportionately large number of genes encoding proteins with roles in motility-related processes, such as cell adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, and cell polarity (data not shown).Guided by this Gene Ontology analysis, we cloned the 3’ UTRs of 16 putative miR-31 targets from these overrepresented categories, including several implicated in tumor invasion (Sahai and Marshall, 2002; McClatchey, 2003), into a luciferase construct.
4619) To do so, we constructed a miR-31 target signature based on coordinate differential expression of these six genes.
4620) The observed magnitude of rescue is surprising, as RhoA is only one member of a larger cohort of metastasis-relevant genes repressed by miR-31.By intravenously injecting mice with 231 cells expressing miR-31 and/or RhoA, we gauged if RhoA-mediated reversal of miR-31-imposed metastasis defects was solely attributable to effects on local invasion.
4621) Thus, miR-31 may represent a marker for metastasis in a variety of breast cancer subtypes; however, its utility as a prognostic indicator will depend on extension of these initial observations.We next assessed the heterogeneity of miR-31 expression in human primary breast tumors, as well as distant metastases arising in the same patients.
4622) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4623) Distant metastases were more homogeneous for the expression of RDX and RhoA than the primary tumors from which they were derived, as >90% of cells in the metastases expressed RDX and RhoA (Figure 7D).
4625) Such duality of action is not unprecedented (Massagué, 2008), and is consistent with notions that metastasis- and tumorigenesis-enabling attributes can be biologically distinct and acquired via independent selective pressures during malignant progression.Previous studies have described effects of specific miRNAs on an early stage of the invasion-metastasis cascade – local invasion.
4626) For example, cell lines accumulate genetic changes in culture, while xenografts fail to recapitulate species-specific interactions between tumor cells and their stroma.
4627) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4628) Our data suggest that the loss of a single gene product can facilitate the completion of multiple distinct steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade; this pleiotropic action may help to explain how tumor cells can accumulate enough genetic and epigenetic aberrations over the course of a human lifespan to overcome the numerous barriers that normally operate to prevent metastasis.
4629) RT-PCR-based detection of mature miR-31 and 5S rRNA was achieved with a mirVana miRNA Detection Kit and gene-specific primers (Ambion).miRNA in situ HybridizationmiRNA expression was assessed from paraffin sections using a protocol adapted from Silahtaroglu et al. (2007).
4632) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
4633) The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the 'seed and soil' hypothesis revisited.
4634) [PubMed]Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Liu CG, Veronese A, Spizzo R, Sabbioni S, Magri E, Pedriali M, Fabbri M, Campiglio M, et al. MicroRNA gene expression deregulation in human breast cancer.
4636) [PMC free article] [PubMed]van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van't Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
4637) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4638) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4639) MicroRNA-21 targets tumor suppressor genes in invasion and metastasis.
4640) These phenotypes do not involve confounding influences on primary tumor development and are specifically attributable to miR-31-mediated inhibition of several steps of metastasis, including local invasion, extravasation or initial survival at a distant site, and metastatic colonization.
4641) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4642) Thus, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were injected into the orthotopic site – the mammary fat pad – of mice.
4647) In the case of RhoA, whose UTR contains two miR-31 sites separated by 152 nucleotides, mutation of either motif abolished miR-31-responsiveness (Figure 4B), suggesting functional interaction between the sites (Grimson et al., 2007).Figure 4Figure 4miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesEndogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA protein levels were assayed in miR-31-expressing 231 cells.
4648) For spontaneous metastasis assays, age-matched female NOD/SCID mice (propagated on-site) were bilaterally injected into the mammary fat pad with the indicated number of tumor cells in 1:2 Matrigel (BD Biosciences) plus normal growth media.
4649) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
4650) The pathogenesis of cancer metastasis: the 'seed and soil' hypothesis revisited.
4651) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4652) In mammalian cells, miRNAs effect gene silencing via both translational inhibition and mRNA degradation; an individual miRNA is capable of regulating dozens of distinct mRNAs, and together the >650 human miRNAs are believed to modulate greater than one-third of the mRNA species encoded in the genome (Bartel, 2009).A central role for miRNAs in the establishment and progression of human tumors has begun to emerge.
4653) Moreover, a role for miRNAs in steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade subsequent to local invasion has not been described.The pleiotropic nature of gene regulation exhibited by miRNAs led us to hypothesize that certain miRNAs might be endowed with a capacity to function as crucial modulators of tumor metastasis.
4654) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4655) These observations suggested that miR-31 regulates early post-intravasation events, such as intraluminal viability, extravasation, and/or initial survival in the lung parenchyma.Three months after tail vein injection, miR-31-expressing 231 cells generated 40-fold fewer lung metastases than did controls (Figure 2G).
4656) Together, these data extended and reinforced our ectopic expression studies by demonstrating that miR-31 affects local invasion, early post-intravasation events, and metastatic colonization.miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesmiR-31’s ability to impede multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade might derive from its ability to pleiotropically regulate genes involved in diverse aspects of metastatic dissemination.
4658) miR-31 did not affect CXCL12 mRNA levels – a computationally predicted miR-31 target found not to be regulated by this miRNA – in either cell type (Figures 4A and 4D).
4659) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4660) Moreover, miR-31 levels correlate inversely with metastatic recurrence in a cohort of human breast tumors, a preliminary association that appears to persist independent of both tumor grade and subtype.Genome-wide studies have described miR-31 downregulation or deletion of the miR-31 genomic locus in human breast cancers (Calin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2008).
4662) This supports beliefs that miRNAs act via the pleiotropic regulation of multiple effectors.Our analyses rely on established human cell lines and xenograft studies, approaches that cannot fully simulate clinical carcinomas.
4663) MicroRNA-21 post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer.
4664) MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions.
4665) [PubMed]Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Liu CG, Veronese A, Spizzo R, Sabbioni S, Magri E, Pedriali M, Fabbri M, Campiglio M, et al. MicroRNA gene expression deregulation in human breast cancer.
4666) miR-206 Expression is down-regulated in estrogen receptor α-positive human breast cancer.
4667) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4669) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
4677) [PMC free article] [PubMed]van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van't Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
4678) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4679) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Zhang L, Huang J, Yang N, Greshock J, Megraw MS, Giannakakis A, Liang S, Naylor TL, Barchetti A, Ward MR, et al. microRNAs exhibit high frequency genomic alterations in human cancer.
4681) Relative to grade-matched estrogen receptor (ER)+ tumors, which are associated with more favorable disease outcome (Sørlie et al., 2001), basal-like tumors exhibited 40% reduced miR-31; no difference in miR-31 levels was observed between ER+ and HER2+ tumors (Figure S16).When these 56 tumors were stratified based on clinical progression, we found that miR-31 expression was diminished in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when compared to normal breast tissue and primary tumors that did not recur; moreover, low miR-31 levels correlated strongly with reduced distant disease-free survival relative to tumors with high miR-31 (Figures 7A and 7B).
4684) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
4692) [PMC free article] [PubMed]van de Vijver MJ, He YD, van't Veer LJ, Dai H, Hart AA, Voskuil DW, Schreiber GJ, Peterse JL, Roberts C, Marton MJ, et al. A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer.
4693) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4694) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Zhang L, Huang J, Yang N, Greshock J, Megraw MS, Giannakakis A, Liang S, Naylor TL, Barchetti A, Ward MR, et al. microRNAs exhibit high frequency genomic alterations in human cancer.
4696) Gene Ontology (Ashburner et al., 2000) revealed that these targets included a disproportionately large number of genes encoding proteins with roles in motility-related processes, such as cell adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, and cell polarity (data not shown).Guided by this Gene Ontology analysis, we cloned the 3’ UTRs of 16 putative miR-31 targets from these overrepresented categories, including several implicated in tumor invasion (Sahai and Marshall, 2002; McClatchey, 2003), into a luciferase construct.
4698) In the case of RhoA, whose UTR contains two miR-31 sites separated by 152 nucleotides, mutation of either motif abolished miR-31-responsiveness (Figure 4B), suggesting functional interaction between the sites (Grimson et al., 2007).Figure 4Figure 4miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesEndogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA protein levels were assayed in miR-31-expressing 231 cells.
4701) Transfection with siRNAs potently reduced target protein levels without affecting cell viability (Figures S12A and S12B).
4702) Briefly, after a four hour pre-hybridization, a 5’ FITC-labeled miRCURY LNA probe targeting miR-31 (Exiqon) was hybridized to proteinase K-treated 10 μm sections at 55°C for 12 hours.
4703) Merlin and ERM proteins: unappreciated roles in cancer development?
4704) The latter are expression constructs that carry miRNA recognition motifs in their 3’ UTR that bind and thus titer miRNAs (Ebert et al., 2007).
4705) We identify a microRNA exemplifying these attributes, miR-31, whose expression correlates inversely with metastasis in human breast cancer patients.
4706) These findings indicate that miR-31 uses multiple mechanisms to oppose metastasis.Go to:INTRODUCTIONMetastases account for 90% of human cancer deaths (Gupta and Massagué, 2006), yet our understanding of the molecular circuitry that governs metastatic dissemination remains fragmentary.
4707) In mammalian cells, miRNAs effect gene silencing via both translational inhibition and mRNA degradation; an individual miRNA is capable of regulating dozens of distinct mRNAs, and together the >650 human miRNAs are believed to modulate greater than one-third of the mRNA species encoded in the genome (Bartel, 2009).A central role for miRNAs in the establishment and progression of human tumors has begun to emerge.
4708) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4709) These studies did not stratify patients based on metastasis status.Expression of the 10 candidate miRNAs was assayed in 15 human and mouse mammary cell lines, which included normal epithelial cells, tumorigenic but non-metastatic cells, and metastatic tumor cells (Table S2).
4710) The levels of a single miRNA, miR-31, were specifically attenuated in aggressive human breast cancer cells when compared to primary normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs).
4711) Thus, we stably expressed miR-31 in metastatic MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells (“231 cells”).
4712) The consequences of miR-31 expression were not unique to 231 cells: miR-31 reduced invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance, yet did not affect proliferation, in aggressive SUM-159 human breast cancer cells (Figure S2).
4714) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4715) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4716) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4717) Thus, miR-31 may represent a marker for metastasis in a variety of breast cancer subtypes; however, its utility as a prognostic indicator will depend on extension of these initial observations.We next assessed the heterogeneity of miR-31 expression in human primary breast tumors, as well as distant metastases arising in the same patients.
4718) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4720) Moreover, miR-31 levels correlate inversely with metastatic recurrence in a cohort of human breast tumors, a preliminary association that appears to persist independent of both tumor grade and subtype.Genome-wide studies have described miR-31 downregulation or deletion of the miR-31 genomic locus in human breast cancers (Calin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2008).
4723) miR-31-imposed suppression of RhoA partially explains the effects of this miRNA on local invasion and early post-intravasation events; however, the mechanisms by which miR-31 suppresses metastatic colonization remain unresolved.The levels of several functionally relevant effectors of miR-31 correlate with disease progression in human tumors.
4724) Similar associations have been described in human tumors for ITGA5 (Sanchez-Carbayo et al., 2006) and the RDX family (McClatchey, 2003).Re-expression of several individual miR-31 targets largely reversed miR-31-imposed defects in vitro.
4725) This supports beliefs that miRNAs act via the pleiotropic regulation of multiple effectors.Our analyses rely on established human cell lines and xenograft studies, approaches that cannot fully simulate clinical carcinomas.
4726) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4727) Our data suggest that the loss of a single gene product can facilitate the completion of multiple distinct steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade; this pleiotropic action may help to explain how tumor cells can accumulate enough genetic and epigenetic aberrations over the course of a human lifespan to overcome the numerous barriers that normally operate to prevent metastasis.
4729) Lysates were collected 24 hours post-transfection, and Renilla and firefly luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega).ImmunoblotsLysates were resolved by electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against β-actin (Santa Cruz), Fzd3 (Abcam), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), MMP16 (Abcam), RDX (Cell Signaling), or RhoA (Santa Cruz).miR-31 Target SignatureExpression profiling of 295 human breast tumors (van de Vijver et al., 2002) was used to categorize tumors as miR-31 target signature-positive or -negative.
4730) [PubMed]Blenkiron C, Goldstein LD, Thorne NP, Spiteri I, Chin SF, Dunning MJ, Barbosa-Morais NL, Teschendorff AE, Green AR, Ellis IO, et al. MicroRNA expression profiling of human breast cancer identifies new markers of tumor subtype.
4732) [PubMed]Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Liu CG, Veronese A, Spizzo R, Sabbioni S, Magri E, Pedriali M, Fabbri M, Campiglio M, et al. MicroRNA gene expression deregulation in human breast cancer.
4733) miR-206 Expression is down-regulated in estrogen receptor α-positive human breast cancer.
4736) [PubMed]Volinia S, Calin GA, Liu CG, Ambs S, Cimmino A, Petrocca F, Visone R, Iorio M, Roldo C, Ferracin M, et al. A microRNA expression signature of human solid tumors defines cancer gene targets.
4737) MicroRNA miR-21 overexpression in human breast cancer is associated with advanced clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and patient poor prognosis.
4738) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Zhang L, Huang J, Yang N, Greshock J, Megraw MS, Giannakakis A, Liang S, Naylor TL, Barchetti A, Ward MR, et al. microRNAs exhibit high frequency genomic alterations in human cancer.
4740) These effects were specifically attributable to the biological activities of miR-31, as equivalent overexpression of a control miRNA, miR-145, failed to influence invasion or motility (Figure 2A and data not shown).
4742) Orthotopic injection of SUM-159 cells expressing miR-31 further corroborated our earlier findings: miR-31 enhanced primary tumor growth, yet miR-31-expressing tumors were more well-confined than control tumors (Figure S5).
4743) This difference was not a consequence of an inability of miR-31-expressing cells to become lodged initially in the lung microvasculature, as equal numbers of miR-31-expressing and control cells were detected in the lungs 10 minutes and two hours post-injection (Figures 2G and S6A).
4744) These observations suggested that miR-31 regulates early post-intravasation events, such as intraluminal viability, extravasation, and/or initial survival in the lung parenchyma.Three months after tail vein injection, miR-31-expressing 231 cells generated 40-fold fewer lung metastases than did controls (Figure 2G).
4745) We also observed a dramatic effect on the size of eventually formed lesions: after three months, miR-31-expressing cells generated only small micrometastases while control cells formed macroscopic metastases; this occurred despite the fact that miR-31-expressing and control cells established comparably sized micrometastases one month post-injection (Figures 2G and S6B).
4746) Primary tumors derived from miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were poorly encapsulated and locally invasive, while control MCF7-Ras tumors appeared well-confined and non-invasive (Figures 3D and 3E).
4747) Again, neovascularization did not differ (Figure S10B).Strikingly, miR-31 sponge-expressing MCF7-Ras cells metastasized to the lungs in significant numbers, while control tumor-bearing host lungs were largely devoid of tumor cells; cells with impaired miR-31 activity formed 10-fold more lesions than did controls (Figure 3F).
4748) Within one day, miR-31 inhibition enhanced cell number in the lungs by six-fold; similarly, at later times after injection, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were 10-fold more prevalent in the lungs than were controls (Figure 3G).
4749) The differing metastatic abilities of control and miR-31 sponge-expressing cells did not arise due to failure of control cells to become lodged initially in the lung vasculature, as equal numbers of cells from each cohort were present 10 minutes after injection (Figures 3G and S11).Suppression of miR-31 also affected lesion size four months after tail vein injection: whereas control cells formed only small micrometastases, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells produced macroscopic metastases (Figure 3G).
4750) Expression of the six targets failed to enhance the invasion or motility of control 231 cells (Figures 5E and S13C).We evaluated if re-expression of any of the six targets rescued miR-31’s effects on anoikis.
4752) Thus, we stably re-expressed miRNA-resistant RhoA in 231 cells that already had been infected with either miR-31 or control vector (Figures S14A and S14B).
4753) RhoA did not affect proliferation in vitro, but did abrogate miR-31-imposed invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance defects (Figures S14C-S14F).To ascertain if restored RhoA levels reversed in vivo metastasis phenotypes ascribable to miR-31, we orthotopically injected mice with 231 cells expressing combinations of miR-31, RhoA, and control vectors.
4754) RhoA initially augmented primary tumor growth in the presence of ectopic miR-31, but failed to do so in control 231 cells (Figure 6A).
4755) In consonance with our earlier findings, control 231 primary tumors were locally invasive, while miR-31-expressing tumors were non-invasive (Figures 6B and 6C).
4756) In control 231 cells, ectopic RhoA failed to exacerbate the extent of local invasion; in contrast, RhoA abolished the previously encapsulated appearance of miR-31-expressing tumors and enabled invasion into surrounding normal tissue (Figures 6B and 6C).Figure 6Figure 6Re-Expression of RhoA Partially Reverses miR-31-Imposed Metastasis Defects in vivoRe-expression of RhoA restored lung metastasis in miR-31-expressing 231 cells to 75% of control cell levels, while RhoA failed to enhance metastasis in control 231 cells (Figure 6D).
4757) While expression of RhoA in control 231 cells failed to enhance metastasis, RhoA restored the number of lung metastases to 60% of control cell levels in miR-31-expressing cells; however, RhoA did not facilitate the formation of macroscopic metastases in cells with ectopic miR-31 (Figure 6E).Together, these data indicated that miR-31’s ability to inhibit metastasis is attributable, in significant part, to its capacity to inhibit RhoA.
4760) MicroRNA-21 post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer.
4761) These studies did not stratify patients based on metastasis status.Expression of the 10 candidate miRNAs was assayed in 15 human and mouse mammary cell lines, which included normal epithelial cells, tumorigenic but non-metastatic cells, and metastatic tumor cells (Table S2).
4762) While non-metastatic tumor cells (HMLER, MCF7-Ras, and SUM-149) exhibited four-fold reduced miR-31, expression of this miRNA in metastatic SUM-159 and MDA-MB-231 cells was diminished by >100-fold (Figure 1A).Figure 1Figure 1miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastatic Ability in Breast Cell LinesRelative to its expression in normal murine mammary gland (NMuMG) cells, miR-31 levels in sub-lines derived from a single murine mammary tumor reflected their capacities to metastasize: miR-31 was reduced by two-fold in metastatic D2.1 and D2A1 cells, but not in non-aggressive D2.OR cells (Figure 1B).
4763) miR-31 levels were also inversely proportional to metastatic ability in four mouse mammary carcinoma sub-lines derived from a single spontaneously arising tumor: while miR-31 levels in non-aggressive 67NR cells were similar to those in NMuMG, miR-31 expression was progressively diminished upon acquisition of the capacity to invade locally (168FARN), to form micrometastases (4TO7), and to yield macroscopic metastases (4T1) (Figure 1B).
4764) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4765) This supports beliefs that miRNAs act via the pleiotropic regulation of multiple effectors.Our analyses rely on established human cell lines and xenograft studies, approaches that cannot fully simulate clinical carcinomas.
4766) For example, cell lines accumulate genetic changes in culture, while xenografts fail to recapitulate species-specific interactions between tumor cells and their stroma.
4767) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4769) These phenotypes do not involve confounding influences on primary tumor development and are specifically attributable to miR-31-mediated inhibition of several steps of metastasis, including local invasion, extravasation or initial survival at a distant site, and metastatic colonization.
4770) These findings indicate that miR-31 uses multiple mechanisms to oppose metastasis.Go to:INTRODUCTIONMetastases account for 90% of human cancer deaths (Gupta and Massagué, 2006), yet our understanding of the molecular circuitry that governs metastatic dissemination remains fragmentary.
4771) The invasion-metastasis cascade, which leads to these growths, is a complex, multistep process involving the escape of neoplastic cells from a primary tumor (local invasion), intravasation into the systemic circulation, survival during transit through the vasculature, extravasation into the parenchyma of distant tissues, the establishment of micrometastases, and ultimately the outgrowth of macroscopic secondary tumors (colonization) (Fidler, 2003).MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute an evolutionarily conserved class of pleiotropically acting small RNAs that suppress gene expression post-transcriptionally via sequence-specific interactions with the 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) of cognate mRNA targets (Bartel, 2009).
4772) In mammalian cells, miRNAs effect gene silencing via both translational inhibition and mRNA degradation; an individual miRNA is capable of regulating dozens of distinct mRNAs, and together the >650 human miRNAs are believed to modulate greater than one-third of the mRNA species encoded in the genome (Bartel, 2009).A central role for miRNAs in the establishment and progression of human tumors has begun to emerge.
4773) In addition, miRNAs have been identified that function as classical oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (Ventura and Jacks, 2009), as well as a limited number that act at late stages of tumor progression (Ma et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2008; Asangani et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).The extent to which miRNAs specifically affect metastasis remains unclear, as all the miRNAs reported to affect metastasis also exert potentially confounding influences on primary tumor development, apoptosis, and/or cell proliferation (Voorhoeve et al., 2006; Sathyan et al., 2007; Ma et al., 2007; Si et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Kondo et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).
4774) Here, we identify an anti-metastatic human miRNA, miR-31, that acts at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade via repression of a cohort of pro-metastatic targets.Go to:RESULTSmiR-31 Expression is Specifically Attenuated in Metastatic Breast Cancer Cell LinesTo identify miRNAs that might regulate breast cancer metastasis, we selected 10 cancer-associated miRNAs for further characterization due to their concordant identification among expression profiling studies of clinical breast tumors (Iorio et al., 2005; Volinia et al., 2006), global analysis of miRNA copy-number variation in human breast carcinomas (Zhang et al., 2006), and localization of miRNA loci to cancer-relevant sites of chromosomal aberration (Calin et al., 2004) (Table S1).
4775) The levels of a single miRNA, miR-31, were specifically attenuated in aggressive human breast cancer cells when compared to primary normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs).
4776) While non-metastatic tumor cells (HMLER, MCF7-Ras, and SUM-149) exhibited four-fold reduced miR-31, expression of this miRNA in metastatic SUM-159 and MDA-MB-231 cells was diminished by >100-fold (Figure 1A).Figure 1Figure 1miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastatic Ability in Breast Cell LinesRelative to its expression in normal murine mammary gland (NMuMG) cells, miR-31 levels in sub-lines derived from a single murine mammary tumor reflected their capacities to metastasize: miR-31 was reduced by two-fold in metastatic D2.1 and D2A1 cells, but not in non-aggressive D2.OR cells (Figure 1B).
4777) Thus, miR-31 levels are specifically attenuated in aggressive breast cancer cells.miR-31 expression was heterogeneous in 4T1 cell primary mammary tumors; of note, the proportion of cells expressing miR-31 was 10-fold reduced in lung metastases relative to the fraction of miR-31-positive cells in the primary tumors from which they were derived (Figure 1C).
4780) These effects were specifically attributable to the biological activities of miR-31, as equivalent overexpression of a control miRNA, miR-145, failed to influence invasion or motility (Figure 2A and data not shown).
4782) The consequences of miR-31 expression were not unique to 231 cells: miR-31 reduced invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance, yet did not affect proliferation, in aggressive SUM-159 human breast cancer cells (Figure S2).
4784) Thus, 231 cells expressing miR-31 were injected into the orthotopic site – the mammary fat pad – of mice.
4786) As before, when injected orthotopically, miR-31-expressing cells formed large, well-encapsulated primary tumors and also reduced lung metastasis by five-fold (Figures S4B-S4D).
4787) Orthotopic injection of SUM-159 cells expressing miR-31 further corroborated our earlier findings: miR-31 enhanced primary tumor growth, yet miR-31-expressing tumors were more well-confined than control tumors (Figure S5).
4788) These observations indicated that the ability of miR-31-expressing cells to form larger, less invasive primary tumors, as well as to seed fewer metastases, is a specific consequence of the biological activities of miR-31.We determined if miR-31’s impact on metastasis was also attributable to effects on later steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade, independent of its influence on local invasion.
4790) This difference was not a consequence of an inability of miR-31-expressing cells to become lodged initially in the lung microvasculature, as equal numbers of miR-31-expressing and control cells were detected in the lungs 10 minutes and two hours post-injection (Figures 2G and S6A).
4791) These observations suggested that miR-31 regulates early post-intravasation events, such as intraluminal viability, extravasation, and/or initial survival in the lung parenchyma.Three months after tail vein injection, miR-31-expressing 231 cells generated 40-fold fewer lung metastases than did controls (Figure 2G).
4792) We also observed a dramatic effect on the size of eventually formed lesions: after three months, miR-31-expressing cells generated only small micrometastases while control cells formed macroscopic metastases; this occurred despite the fact that miR-31-expressing and control cells established comparably sized micrometastases one month post-injection (Figures 2G and S6B).
4794) The latter are expression constructs that carry miRNA recognition motifs in their 3’ UTR that bind and thus titer miRNAs (Ebert et al., 2007).
4798) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4799) Collectively, these data indicated that sustained miR-31 activity is necessary to prevent the acquisition of aggressive traits by both tumor cells and untransformed breast epithelial cells.Inhibition of miR-31 Promotes Metastasis in vivoWe exploited our ability to stably inhibit miRNAs in order to assess whether miR-31 activity is required to prevent metastasis in vivo.
4801) Within one day, miR-31 inhibition enhanced cell number in the lungs by six-fold; similarly, at later times after injection, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells were 10-fold more prevalent in the lungs than were controls (Figure 3G).
4802) The differing metastatic abilities of control and miR-31 sponge-expressing cells did not arise due to failure of control cells to become lodged initially in the lung vasculature, as equal numbers of cells from each cohort were present 10 minutes after injection (Figures 3G and S11).Suppression of miR-31 also affected lesion size four months after tail vein injection: whereas control cells formed only small micrometastases, miR-31 sponge-expressing cells produced macroscopic metastases (Figure 3G).
4803) Together, these data extended and reinforced our ectopic expression studies by demonstrating that miR-31 affects local invasion, early post-intravasation events, and metastatic colonization.miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesmiR-31’s ability to impede multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade might derive from its ability to pleiotropically regulate genes involved in diverse aspects of metastatic dissemination.
4805) In the case of RhoA, whose UTR contains two miR-31 sites separated by 152 nucleotides, mutation of either motif abolished miR-31-responsiveness (Figure 4B), suggesting functional interaction between the sites (Grimson et al., 2007).Figure 4Figure 4miR-31 Directly Regulates a Cohort of Pro-Metastatic GenesEndogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA protein levels were assayed in miR-31-expressing 231 cells.
4807) miR-31 did not affect CXCL12 mRNA levels – a computationally predicted miR-31 target found not to be regulated by this miRNA – in either cell type (Figures 4A and 4D).
4808) These data indicated that miR-31 directly regulates endogenous Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX and RhoA expression in human breast cancer cells.We determined if concomitant repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with disease progression in clinical breast cancers by examining expression profiling data from 295 primary breast tumors (Table S4) (van de Vijver et al., 2002).
4809) Thus, coordinate repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, M-RIP, MMP16, RDX, and RhoA correlated with more favorable outcome in clinical breast tumors.Figure 5Figure 5Repression of Fzd3, ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA Underlies miR-31-Dependent Phenotypes in vitroTo assess the functional contributions of these miR-31 targets to aggressive phenotypes, we first examined if their inhibition affected the invasion or motility of 231 cells.
4810) Transfection with siRNAs potently reduced target protein levels without affecting cell viability (Figures S12A and S12B).
4816) Expression of the six targets failed to enhance the invasion or motility of control 231 cells (Figures 5E and S13C).We evaluated if re-expression of any of the six targets rescued miR-31’s effects on anoikis.
4819) Thus, we stably re-expressed miRNA-resistant RhoA in 231 cells that already had been infected with either miR-31 or control vector (Figures S14A and S14B).
4820) RhoA did not affect proliferation in vitro, but did abrogate miR-31-imposed invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance defects (Figures S14C-S14F).To ascertain if restored RhoA levels reversed in vivo metastasis phenotypes ascribable to miR-31, we orthotopically injected mice with 231 cells expressing combinations of miR-31, RhoA, and control vectors.
4821) RhoA initially augmented primary tumor growth in the presence of ectopic miR-31, but failed to do so in control 231 cells (Figure 6A).
4822) In control 231 cells, ectopic RhoA failed to exacerbate the extent of local invasion; in contrast, RhoA abolished the previously encapsulated appearance of miR-31-expressing tumors and enabled invasion into surrounding normal tissue (Figures 6B and 6C).Figure 6Figure 6Re-Expression of RhoA Partially Reverses miR-31-Imposed Metastasis Defects in vivoRe-expression of RhoA restored lung metastasis in miR-31-expressing 231 cells to 75% of control cell levels, while RhoA failed to enhance metastasis in control 231 cells (Figure 6D).
4823) The observed magnitude of rescue is surprising, as RhoA is only one member of a larger cohort of metastasis-relevant genes repressed by miR-31.By intravenously injecting mice with 231 cells expressing miR-31 and/or RhoA, we gauged if RhoA-mediated reversal of miR-31-imposed metastasis defects was solely attributable to effects on local invasion.
4824) While expression of miR-31 and/or RhoA failed to affect the initial lodging of tumor cells in the lung vasculature, the number of cells that persisted in the lungs differed within one day of injection (Figures 6E and S15).
4825) While expression of RhoA in control 231 cells failed to enhance metastasis, RhoA restored the number of lung metastases to 60% of control cell levels in miR-31-expressing cells; however, RhoA did not facilitate the formation of macroscopic metastases in cells with ectopic miR-31 (Figure 6E).Together, these data indicated that miR-31’s ability to inhibit metastasis is attributable, in significant part, to its capacity to inhibit RhoA.
4827) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4828) Relative to grade-matched estrogen receptor (ER)+ tumors, which are associated with more favorable disease outcome (Sørlie et al., 2001), basal-like tumors exhibited 40% reduced miR-31; no difference in miR-31 levels was observed between ER+ and HER2+ tumors (Figure S16).When these 56 tumors were stratified based on clinical progression, we found that miR-31 expression was diminished in primary tumors that subsequently metastasized, when compared to normal breast tissue and primary tumors that did not recur; moreover, low miR-31 levels correlated strongly with reduced distant disease-free survival relative to tumors with high miR-31 (Figures 7A and 7B).
4829) Similarly, within this cohort of tumors, high RhoA expression was associated with an increased incidence of distant metastasis (Figure S17).Figure 7Figure 7miR-31 Levels Correlate Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsThe association of low miR-31 levels with metastasis persisted independent of both tumor grade and molecular subtype (Figure S18).
4830) miR-31 was expressed in 65% of the cells in these primary tumors; however, miR-31 was detected in only 12–30% of cells in patient-matched distant metastases (Figure 7C).
4831) These data raise the possibility that selective pressures operating over the course of breast cancer progression diminish the representation of miR-31-expressing cells within the population of successfully metastasizing cells.Finally, we asked if expression of ITGA5, RDX, and RhoA was also heterogeneous in primary human breast tumors.
4832) RDX and RhoA were expressed in 60–75% of cells in the primary tumors examined, while ITGA5 was detected in >80% of cells (Figure 7D).
4833) Moreover, miR-31 levels correlate inversely with metastatic recurrence in a cohort of human breast tumors, a preliminary association that appears to persist independent of both tumor grade and subtype.Genome-wide studies have described miR-31 downregulation or deletion of the miR-31 genomic locus in human breast cancers (Calin et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2006; Yan et al., 2008).
4837) This suggests one putative mechanism by which the invasion-metastasis cascade could be initiated very early during the course of tumor progression, a phenomenon that has recently been observed in clinical breast tumors (Hüsemann et al., 2008).Given the capacity of miR-31 to enhance primary tumor growth, an oncogenic role for this miRNA (mechanistically independent of its metastasis-suppressive functions) cannot be formally excluded.
4838) Such duality of action is not unprecedented (Massagué, 2008), and is consistent with notions that metastasis- and tumorigenesis-enabling attributes can be biologically distinct and acquired via independent selective pressures during malignant progression.Previous studies have described effects of specific miRNAs on an early stage of the invasion-metastasis cascade – local invasion.
4839) miR-31-imposed suppression of RhoA partially explains the effects of this miRNA on local invasion and early post-intravasation events; however, the mechanisms by which miR-31 suppresses metastatic colonization remain unresolved.The levels of several functionally relevant effectors of miR-31 correlate with disease progression in human tumors.
4840) Similar associations have been described in human tumors for ITGA5 (Sanchez-Carbayo et al., 2006) and the RDX family (McClatchey, 2003).Re-expression of several individual miR-31 targets largely reversed miR-31-imposed defects in vitro.
4841) This may indicate that certain miR-31 effectors activate one another; however, ectopic ITGA5, RDX, or RhoA did not induce the expression of other miR-31 targets (data not shown).
4845) This supports beliefs that miRNAs act via the pleiotropic regulation of multiple effectors.Our analyses rely on established human cell lines and xenograft studies, approaches that cannot fully simulate clinical carcinomas.
4846) For example, cell lines accumulate genetic changes in culture, while xenografts fail to recapitulate species-specific interactions between tumor cells and their stroma.
4847) However, the consistency of our results upon use of multiple independent cell lines (including a single-cell-derived population), the convergence of our gain- and loss-of-function findings, and our correlative studies in human breast cancer patients and murine mammary tumor cell lines argue against major confounding influences stemming from our experimental models.Collectively, the findings of the present study carry significant implications regarding our understanding of the pathogenesis of high-grade malignancies.
4850) RT-PCR-based detection of mature miR-31 and 5S rRNA was achieved with a mirVana miRNA Detection Kit and gene-specific primers (Ambion).miRNA in situ HybridizationmiRNA expression was assessed from paraffin sections using a protocol adapted from Silahtaroglu et al. (2007).
4851) Briefly, after a four hour pre-hybridization, a 5’ FITC-labeled miRCURY LNA probe targeting miR-31 (Exiqon) was hybridized to proteinase K-treated 10 μm sections at 55°C for 12 hours.
4856) Tumors were considered miR-31-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of miR-31 resided in the top or bottom 30% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.
4859) For spontaneous metastasis assays, age-matched female NOD/SCID mice (propagated on-site) were bilaterally injected into the mammary fat pad with the indicated number of tumor cells in 1:2 Matrigel (BD Biosciences) plus normal growth media.
4862) Lysates were collected 24 hours post-transfection, and Renilla and firefly luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega).ImmunoblotsLysates were resolved by electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against β-actin (Santa Cruz), Fzd3 (Abcam), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), MMP16 (Abcam), RDX (Cell Signaling), or RhoA (Santa Cruz).miR-31 Target SignatureExpression profiling of 295 human breast tumors (van de Vijver et al., 2002) was used to categorize tumors as miR-31 target signature-positive or -negative.
4863) Tumors were considered target signature-positive or -negative if the normalized expression of multiple of the six miR-31 targets herein identified resided in the top or bottom 15% of tumors in this cohort, respectively.ImmunohistochemistryDetection of Ki-67 (Pharmingen), MECA-32 (U. of Iowa), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), RDX (Santa Cruz), or RhoA (Abcam) was performed on 5 μm paraffin sections using the indicated antibodies, Vectastain Elite ABC kits (Vector), and ImmPACT DAB Substrate (Vector).Statistical AnalysesData are presented as mean ± s.e.m.
4867) MicroRNA-21 post-transcriptionally downregulates tumor suppressor Pdcd4 and stimulates invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer.
4869) MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions.
4872) miR-206 Expression is down-regulated in estrogen receptor α-positive human breast cancer.
4873) Merlin and ERM proteins: unappreciated roles in cancer development?
4874) Distinct organ-specific metastatic potential of individual breast cancer cells and primary tumors.
4877) These effects were specifically attributable to the biological activities of miR-31, as equivalent overexpression of a control miRNA, miR-145, failed to influence invasion or motility (Figure 2A and data not shown).
4878) These observations indicated that the ability of miR-31-expressing cells to form larger, less invasive primary tumors, as well as to seed fewer metastases, is a specific consequence of the biological activities of miR-31.We determined if miR-31’s impact on metastasis was also attributable to effects on later steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade, independent of its influence on local invasion.
4880) Collectively, these data indicated that sustained miR-31 activity is necessary to prevent the acquisition of aggressive traits by both tumor cells and untransformed breast epithelial cells.Inhibition of miR-31 Promotes Metastasis in vivoWe exploited our ability to stably inhibit miRNAs in order to assess whether miR-31 activity is required to prevent metastasis in vivo.
4881) Again, neovascularization did not differ (Figure S10B).Strikingly, miR-31 sponge-expressing MCF7-Ras cells metastasized to the lungs in significant numbers, while control tumor-bearing host lungs were largely devoid of tumor cells; cells with impaired miR-31 activity formed 10-fold more lesions than did controls (Figure 3F).
4885) This may indicate that certain miR-31 effectors activate one another; however, ectopic ITGA5, RDX, or RhoA did not induce the expression of other miR-31 targets (data not shown).
4886) Lysates were collected 24 hours post-transfection, and Renilla and firefly luciferase activities were measured with a Dual-Luciferase Reporter System (Promega).ImmunoblotsLysates were resolved by electrophoresis, transferred to a PVDF membrane, and probed with antibodies against β-actin (Santa Cruz), Fzd3 (Abcam), ITGA5 (Santa Cruz), MMP16 (Abcam), RDX (Cell Signaling), or RhoA (Santa Cruz).miR-31 Target SignatureExpression profiling of 295 human breast tumors (van de Vijver et al., 2002) was used to categorize tumors as miR-31 target signature-positive or -negative.
4887) In addition, miRNAs have been identified that function as classical oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (Ventura and Jacks, 2009), as well as a limited number that act at late stages of tumor progression (Ma et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2008; Asangani et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).The extent to which miRNAs specifically affect metastasis remains unclear, as all the miRNAs reported to affect metastasis also exert potentially confounding influences on primary tumor development, apoptosis, and/or cell proliferation (Voorhoeve et al., 2006; Sathyan et al., 2007; Ma et al., 2007; Si et al., 2007; Tavazoie et al., 2008; Kondo et al., 2008; Lujambio et al., 2008).
4888) This suggests one putative mechanism by which the invasion-metastasis cascade could be initiated very early during the course of tumor progression, a phenomenon that has recently been observed in clinical breast tumors (Hüsemann et al., 2008).Given the capacity of miR-31 to enhance primary tumor growth, an oncogenic role for this miRNA (mechanistically independent of its metastasis-suppressive functions) cannot be formally excluded.
4889) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
4890) Weinberg1,2,7,*Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:SUMMARYMicroRNAs are well-suited to regulate tumor metastasis due to their capacity to coordinately repress numerous target genes, thereby potentially enabling their intervention at multiple steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.
4892) The miR-31 sponge failed to alter in vitro proliferation (Figure S8D).When stably expressed in immortalized HMECs or tumorigenic but non-metastatic SUM-149 human breast cancer cells, the miR-31 sponge elicited increased invasion, motility, and anoikis resistance without affecting proliferation (Figure S9 and data not shown).
4893) However, these data also implied that the full spectrum of miR-31’s effects on metastasis are elicited only via the coordinate repression of multiple targets, as suppression of RhoA alone could not explain the complete impact of miR-31 on the number of metastases formed or its effects on metastatic colonization.miR-31 Expression Correlates Inversely With Metastasis in Human Breast TumorsBecause established cell lines and xenograft studies cannot fully recapitulate clinical malignancy, we extended our analyses by assaying miR-31 expression in specimens from 56 human breast cancer patients (Table S5; Median follow-up = 59 months).
4894) The human genome contains a dozen of let-7 family members, organized in eight different loci (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/cgi-bin/sequences/mirna_summary.pl?fam=MIPF0000002).
4895) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
4896) miRNAs act by modulating the expression of target genes via sequence complementarity between the so-called “seed” sequence of the miRNA and the “seed-match” present in the mRNA.
4897) Such binding inhibits the translation and reduces the stability of the target mRNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein (reviewed in Eulalio et al., 2008)).
4898) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
4899) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
4900) By contrast, the physical deletion or epigenetic silencing of a miRNA that normally functions to repress expression of one or more oncogenes might lead to increased protein expression and gain of oncogenic potency.
4901) These range from genomic and gene expression alterations affecting miRNA genes in human cancers to observations in genetically-engineered mouse models of the disease.
4902) Moreover, miRNA expression profiling studies comparing cancer tissue to normal tissue have revealed provocative patterns of miRNA expression, some of which have been linked to changes in methylation status of the miRNA genes (Reviewed in Saito and Jones, 2006).
4903) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
4905) miR-17~92 is also frequently over-expressed in several other human cancers, including lung cancers (Hayashita et al., 2005), hepatocarcinomas (Connolly et al., 2008), neuroblastomas (Schulte et al., 2008), and colorectal cancers (He et al., 2005).
4906) While miR-17~92 deregulation does not appear to be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis per se, transgenic mice over-expressing this cluster in lymphocyte progenitors cells develop a lymphoproliferative disorder affecting both B and T cells that eventually results in autoimmunity (Xiao et al., 2008).
4907) Its 3′UTR contains multiple binding sites for miRNAs encoded by miR-17~92 and, consistent with Bim being a direct target of miR-17~92, its levels are increased in miR-17~92 –null pre-B cells and reduced in B cell from mice overexpressing miR-17~92.
4908) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
4910) This mutation has been linked to a reduced expression of miR-16-1, possibly due to less efficient processing of the precursor RNA, but large scale studies are needed to determine whether this is indeed a cancer-predisposing mutation.
4911) In the same study, the therapeutic potential of reconstituting expression of this cluster was illustrated by the significant regression of prostatic tumor xenografts upon intra-tumoral delivery of miR-15a and miR-16-1.
4912) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
4913) Finally, over-expression of let-7 miRNAs can suppress tumor development in mouse models of breast and lung cancer (Esquela-Kerscher et al., 2008; Kumar et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2007).
4916) Reduced expression of miR-34b/miR-34c has been reported in breast and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (Bommer et al., 2007; Calin et al., 2004).
4917) Interestingly, this region includes another candidate tumor suppressor gene, CDH5, that acts by inducing p53 expression via p19Arf (Bagchi et al., 2007).
4918) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
4919) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
4920) Based on their differential expression in non-metastatic versus metastatic breast cancer cell lines, miR-126, miR-206 and miR-335 were also proposed to be inhibitors of tumor progression (Tavazoie et al., 2008).
4921) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
4922) However, recent work has also revealed intriguing changes in the global state of miRNA expression in cancer.
4923) Specifically, miRNA expression profiling experiments have demonstrated that most (although not all) miRNAs are under-expressed in tumor tissue compared to normal (Lu et al., 2005).
4924) Finally, a recent study has demonstrated a widespread transcriptional silencing of miRNAs by c-Myc (Chang et al., 2008), suggesting that this might contribute to its potent oncogenic activity.Independent of the functional consequences of miRNA expression patterns in cancer, miRNA profiles have value as diagnostic and prognostic markers of the disease.
4926) Genetic and epigenetic silencing of microRNA-203 enhances ABL1 and BCR-ABL1 oncogene expression.
4927) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Chang TC, Wentzel EA, Kent OA, Ramachandran K, Mullendore M, Lee KH, Feldmann G, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Lowenstein CJ, et al. Transactivation of miR-34a by p53 broadly influences gene expression and promotes apoptosis.
4930) A polycistronic microRNA cluster, miR-17–92, is overexpressed in human lung cancers and enhances cell proliferation.
4932) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
4937) [PubMed]Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H, Endoh H, Harano T, Yatabe Y, Nagino M, Nimura Y, et al. Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
4939) miRNAs act by modulating the expression of target genes via sequence complementarity between the so-called “seed” sequence of the miRNA and the “seed-match” present in the mRNA.
4940) Such binding inhibits the translation and reduces the stability of the target mRNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein (reviewed in Eulalio et al., 2008)).
4941) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
4942) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
4943) More subtle miRNA mutations could reduce or eliminate binding to key targets or even create seed sequences to target a new set of mRNAs, thereby altering the balance of critical growth regulatory proteins.
4944) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
4945) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
4949) Its 3′UTR contains multiple binding sites for miRNAs encoded by miR-17~92 and, consistent with Bim being a direct target of miR-17~92, its levels are increased in miR-17~92 –null pre-B cells and reduced in B cell from mice overexpressing miR-17~92.
4950) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
4951) However, in none of these cases has the definitive in vivo loss-of-function experiment been performed via gene targeting in the mouse.The miR-15a~16-1 cluster of miRNAs has recently emerged as an excellent candidate to be the long sought-after tumor suppressor gene on 13q14.
4952) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
4955) A clearer picture will likely emerge as the efforts to re-sequence the cancer genome reveal the true frequency of mutations in miRNAs and in their target sequences in protein-coding genes (although the latter will require specific analysis of the 3′ UTR regions).
4957) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
4958) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Cimmino A, Calin GA, Fabbri M, Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Shimizu M, Wojcik SE, Aqeilan RI, Zupo S, Dono M, et al. miR-15 and miR-16 induce apoptosis by targeting BCL2.
4961) MicroRNAs 17–5p-20a-106a control monocytopoiesis through AML1 targeting and M-CSF receptor upregulation.
4963) The miR-200 family inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer cell migration by direct targeting of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2.
4967) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
4968) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
4969) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
4970) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
4971) Taken together, the available data provide a compelling case that alterations in miRNA-mRNA regulation can promote tumor development.As is true for protein-coding genes associated with cancer, the most convincing evidence linking miRNAs to tumorigenesis comes from genetic alterations in cancer cells.
4972) Beginning with the work of Croce and colleagues in 2002 (Calin et al., 2002), who showed that a pair of neighboring miRNAs are frequently focally deleted in human chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; see below), there are now several examples in which miRNA genes are either lost or amplified in tumors (Reviewed in Calin and Croce, 2006).
4973) Functional studies performed in cancer cell lines or mouse models of the disease have provided further support for a direct role of a subset of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis.
4975) In an important in vivo test of the oncogenic potential of miR-17~92, He et al. demonstrated that a truncated version of the cluster (lacking miR-92) could cooperate with c-Myc and greatly accelerate tumorigenesis in a mouse model of B cell lymphoma (He et al., 2005).
4976) While miR-17~92 deregulation does not appear to be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis per se, transgenic mice over-expressing this cluster in lymphocyte progenitors cells develop a lymphoproliferative disorder affecting both B and T cells that eventually results in autoimmunity (Xiao et al., 2008).
4977) Bim belongs to the family of pro-apoptotic BH3 only proteins, and has long been known to be a critical regulator of B cell survival (Bouillet et al., 1999; Bouillet et al., 2002) and a potent tumor suppressor gene in the Eμ-Myc model of B cell lymphoma (Egle et al., 2004; Hemann et al., 2005).
4978) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
4979) However, in none of these cases has the definitive in vivo loss-of-function experiment been performed via gene targeting in the mouse.The miR-15a~16-1 cluster of miRNAs has recently emerged as an excellent candidate to be the long sought-after tumor suppressor gene on 13q14.
4981) An interesting observation in this regard is that in New Zealand Black mice (NZB), a mouse strain that shows a strong predisposition to the development of a B lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) reminiscent of human CLL, a very similar base change in pre-miR-16-1 has been linked to the development of LPD (Raveche et al., 2007).It appears that the tumor suppressive activity of miR-15a~16-1 is not limited to B cells.
4982) In the same study, the therapeutic potential of reconstituting expression of this cluster was illustrated by the significant regression of prostatic tumor xenografts upon intra-tumoral delivery of miR-15a and miR-16-1.
4983) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
4984) Consistent with a role in inhibiting tumor development in humans, reduced levels of multiple members of the let-7 family are frequently observed in lung cancers, where they correlate with poor prognosis (Takamizawa et al., 2004; Yanaihara et al., 2006).
4985) Finally, over-expression of let-7 miRNAs can suppress tumor development in mouse models of breast and lung cancer (Esquela-Kerscher et al., 2008; Kumar et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2007).
4986) Mouse knock-out studies have not been reported for any let-7 family members, and, given the potential for functional overlap within this family, it may be a while before it is clear whether loss of let-7 function in the mouse can promote tumorigenesis.A series of recent reports has explored the regulation of miRNAs by tumor suppressor genes.
4987) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
4988) Interestingly, this region includes another candidate tumor suppressor gene, CDH5, that acts by inducing p53 expression via p19Arf (Bagchi et al., 2007).
4990) Several cell biological processes, including those controlling adhesion, migration and invasion, are involved in allowing primary tumor cells to leave their original location and move to another site in the body.
4991) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
4993) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
4994) Based on their differential expression in non-metastatic versus metastatic breast cancer cell lines, miR-126, miR-206 and miR-335 were also proposed to be inhibitors of tumor progression (Tavazoie et al., 2008).
4995) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
4996) Specifically, miRNA expression profiling experiments have demonstrated that most (although not all) miRNAs are under-expressed in tumor tissue compared to normal (Lu et al., 2005).
4997) While it is possible that this phenomenon reflects the less differentiated state of the tumor cells and/or their higher proliferation rate, one alternative explanation is that reduced miRNA levels are selected for during tumorigenesis because this itself provide some proliferative or survival advantage.
4998) On the other hand, working with experimental models of lung cancer, Kumar and colleagues have shown that genetic or RNAi-based inhibition of miRNA biogenesis can promote tumor formation and progression (Kumar et al., 2007).
5001) As increasingly effective pharmacological means to modulate miRNA activities are currently being developed (Elmen et al., 2008a; Elmen et al., 2008b; Krutzfeldt et al., 2005), identifying miRNAs that are essential for tumor maintenance or for metastasis might provide exciting new therapeutic opportunities.
5003) [PubMed]Bommer GT, Gerin I, Feng Y, Kaczorowski AJ, Kuick R, Love RE, Zhai Y, Giordano TJ, Qin ZS, Moore BB, et al. p53-mediated activation of miRNA34 candidate tumor-suppressor genes.
5006) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, Sevignani C, Wentzel E, Furth EE, Lee WM, Enders GH, Mendell JT, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
5011) The tumor suppressor microRNA let-7 represses the HMGA2 oncogene.
5012) Epigenetic activation of tumor suppressor microRNAs in human cancer cells.
5013) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
5015) Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis.
5016) [PubMed]Yu F, Yao H, Zhu P, Zhang X, Pan Q, Gong C, Huang Y, Hu X, Su F, Lieberman J, et al. let-7 regulates self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells.
5017) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
5018) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5019) These range from genomic and gene expression alterations affecting miRNA genes in human cancers to observations in genetically-engineered mouse models of the disease.
5020) Taken together, the available data provide a compelling case that alterations in miRNA-mRNA regulation can promote tumor development.As is true for protein-coding genes associated with cancer, the most convincing evidence linking miRNAs to tumorigenesis comes from genetic alterations in cancer cells.
5021) Moreover, miRNA expression profiling studies comparing cancer tissue to normal tissue have revealed provocative patterns of miRNA expression, some of which have been linked to changes in methylation status of the miRNA genes (Reviewed in Saito and Jones, 2006).
5022) Functional studies performed in cancer cell lines or mouse models of the disease have provided further support for a direct role of a subset of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis.
5023) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
5025) miR-17~92 is also frequently over-expressed in several other human cancers, including lung cancers (Hayashita et al., 2005), hepatocarcinomas (Connolly et al., 2008), neuroblastomas (Schulte et al., 2008), and colorectal cancers (He et al., 2005).
5026) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
5029) This mutation has been linked to a reduced expression of miR-16-1, possibly due to less efficient processing of the precursor RNA, but large scale studies are needed to determine whether this is indeed a cancer-predisposing mutation.
5031) Consistent with a role in inhibiting tumor development in humans, reduced levels of multiple members of the let-7 family are frequently observed in lung cancers, where they correlate with poor prognosis (Takamizawa et al., 2004; Yanaihara et al., 2006).
5032) In addition, various let-7 genes are located at chromosomal sites deleted in a variety of human cancers (Calin et al., 2004).
5033) Finally, over-expression of let-7 miRNAs can suppress tumor development in mouse models of breast and lung cancer (Esquela-Kerscher et al., 2008; Kumar et al., 2008; Yu et al., 2007).
5034) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
5035) Reduced expression of miR-34b/miR-34c has been reported in breast and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (Bommer et al., 2007; Calin et al., 2004).
5037) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
5039) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
5040) Based on their differential expression in non-metastatic versus metastatic breast cancer cell lines, miR-126, miR-206 and miR-335 were also proposed to be inhibitors of tumor progression (Tavazoie et al., 2008).
5041) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
5042) However, recent work has also revealed intriguing changes in the global state of miRNA expression in cancer.
5044) On the other hand, working with experimental models of lung cancer, Kumar and colleagues have shown that genetic or RNAi-based inhibition of miRNA biogenesis can promote tumor formation and progression (Kumar et al., 2007).
5045) Finally, a recent study has demonstrated a widespread transcriptional silencing of miRNAs by c-Myc (Chang et al., 2008), suggesting that this might contribute to its potent oncogenic activity.Independent of the functional consequences of miRNA expression patterns in cancer, miRNA profiles have value as diagnostic and prognostic markers of the disease.
5051) A clearer picture will likely emerge as the efforts to re-sequence the cancer genome reveal the true frequency of mutations in miRNAs and in their target sequences in protein-coding genes (although the latter will require specific analysis of the 3′ UTR regions).
5054) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
5058) [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
5060) A polycistronic microRNA cluster, miR-17–92, is overexpressed in human lung cancers and enhances cell proliferation.
5061) The miR-200 family inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer cell migration by direct targeting of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2.
5062) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
5065) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Petrocca F, Visone R, Onelli MR, Shah MH, Nicoloso MS, de Martino I, Iliopoulos D, Pilozzi E, Liu CG, Negrini M, et al. E2F1-regulated microRNAs impair TGFbeta-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in gastric cancer.
5066) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Rosenfeld N, Aharonov R, Meiri E, Rosenwald S, Spector Y, Zepeniuk M, Benjamin H, Shabes N, Tabak S, Levy A, et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin.
5067) Epigenetic activation of tumor suppressor microRNAs in human cancer cells.
5068) [PubMed]Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H, Endoh H, Harano T, Yatabe Y, Nagino M, Nimura Y, et al. Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
5071) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Yanaihara N, Caplen N, Bowman E, Seike M, Kumamoto K, Yi M, Stephens RM, Okamoto A, Yokota J, Tanaka T, et al. Unique microRNA molecular profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
5072) [PubMed]Yu F, Yao H, Zhu P, Zhang X, Pan Q, Gong C, Huang Y, Hu X, Su F, Lieberman J, et al. let-7 regulates self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells.
5073) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
5075) miRNAs act by modulating the expression of target genes via sequence complementarity between the so-called “seed” sequence of the miRNA and the “seed-match” present in the mRNA.
5076) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
5077) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5078) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
5079) By contrast, the physical deletion or epigenetic silencing of a miRNA that normally functions to repress expression of one or more oncogenes might lead to increased protein expression and gain of oncogenic potency.
5080) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
5081) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5082) These range from genomic and gene expression alterations affecting miRNA genes in human cancers to observations in genetically-engineered mouse models of the disease.
5083) Taken together, the available data provide a compelling case that alterations in miRNA-mRNA regulation can promote tumor development.As is true for protein-coding genes associated with cancer, the most convincing evidence linking miRNAs to tumorigenesis comes from genetic alterations in cancer cells.
5084) Beginning with the work of Croce and colleagues in 2002 (Calin et al., 2002), who showed that a pair of neighboring miRNAs are frequently focally deleted in human chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; see below), there are now several examples in which miRNA genes are either lost or amplified in tumors (Reviewed in Calin and Croce, 2006).
5085) Moreover, miRNA expression profiling studies comparing cancer tissue to normal tissue have revealed provocative patterns of miRNA expression, some of which have been linked to changes in methylation status of the miRNA genes (Reviewed in Saito and Jones, 2006).
5086) Functional studies performed in cancer cell lines or mouse models of the disease have provided further support for a direct role of a subset of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis.
5087) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
5091) In an elegant set of genetic experiments in mice, two groups have shown that mutating a single recognition site for miR-155 in the 3-UTR of AID can partially phenocopy the consequences of miR-155 deletion (Dorsett et al., 2008; Teng et al., 2008).Another notable member of the family of oncogenic miRNAs is the miR-17~92 cluster.
5092) In an important in vivo test of the oncogenic potential of miR-17~92, He et al. demonstrated that a truncated version of the cluster (lacking miR-92) could cooperate with c-Myc and greatly accelerate tumorigenesis in a mouse model of B cell lymphoma (He et al., 2005).
5093) While miR-17~92 deregulation does not appear to be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis per se, transgenic mice over-expressing this cluster in lymphocyte progenitors cells develop a lymphoproliferative disorder affecting both B and T cells that eventually results in autoimmunity (Xiao et al., 2008).
5094) In contrast, mice carrying a homozygous deletion of the miR-17~92 locus exhibit premature death of B cells at the pro-B/pre-B stage, resulting in lymphopenia (Ventura et al., 2008).While the full spectrum of genes regulated by the six miRNAs encoded by the miR-17~92 cluster is still unknown, one candidate, the pro-apoptotic gene Bim, has been proposed to be a likely mediator of the B cell phenotype in miR-17~92-null and in miR-17~92 transgenic mice (Ventura et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 2008).
5095) Bim belongs to the family of pro-apoptotic BH3 only proteins, and has long been known to be a critical regulator of B cell survival (Bouillet et al., 1999; Bouillet et al., 2002) and a potent tumor suppressor gene in the Eμ-Myc model of B cell lymphoma (Egle et al., 2004; Hemann et al., 2005).
5096) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
5097) However, in none of these cases has the definitive in vivo loss-of-function experiment been performed via gene targeting in the mouse.The miR-15a~16-1 cluster of miRNAs has recently emerged as an excellent candidate to be the long sought-after tumor suppressor gene on 13q14.
5098) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
5099) In addition, various let-7 genes are located at chromosomal sites deleted in a variety of human cancers (Calin et al., 2004).
5100) Let-7 genes can also be directly repressed by the c-Myc oncoprotein (Chang et al., 2008) and their precursor RNAs subjected to inhibition of further processing by lin-28 (Newman et al., 2008; Rybak et al., 2008; Viswanathan et al., 2008).
5102) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5103) Mouse knock-out studies have not been reported for any let-7 family members, and, given the potential for functional overlap within this family, it may be a while before it is clear whether loss of let-7 function in the mouse can promote tumorigenesis.A series of recent reports has explored the regulation of miRNAs by tumor suppressor genes.
5104) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
5105) Interestingly, this region includes another candidate tumor suppressor gene, CDH5, that acts by inducing p53 expression via p19Arf (Bagchi et al., 2007).
5106) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
5107) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
5108) While it is possible that this phenomenon reflects the less differentiated state of the tumor cells and/or their higher proliferation rate, one alternative explanation is that reduced miRNA levels are selected for during tumorigenesis because this itself provide some proliferative or survival advantage.
5109) On the other hand, working with experimental models of lung cancer, Kumar and colleagues have shown that genetic or RNAi-based inhibition of miRNA biogenesis can promote tumor formation and progression (Kumar et al., 2007).
5110) A clearer picture will likely emerge as the efforts to re-sequence the cancer genome reveal the true frequency of mutations in miRNAs and in their target sequences in protein-coding genes (although the latter will require specific analysis of the 3′ UTR regions).
5111) What begun sixteen years ago as a peculiar discovery in the simple worm has already gone a long way to change the way we think of gene regulation.
5113) [PubMed]Bommer GT, Gerin I, Feng Y, Kaczorowski AJ, Kuick R, Love RE, Zhai Y, Giordano TJ, Qin ZS, Moore BB, et al. p53-mediated activation of miRNA34 candidate tumor-suppressor genes.
5114) Genetic and epigenetic silencing of microRNA-203 enhances ABL1 and BCR-ABL1 oncogene expression.
5117) [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
5118) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Chang TC, Wentzel EA, Kent OA, Ramachandran K, Mullendore M, Lee KH, Feldmann G, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Lowenstein CJ, et al. Transactivation of miR-34a by p53 broadly influences gene expression and promotes apoptosis.
5120) Multiple proto-oncogene activations in avian leukosis virus-induced lymphomas: evidence for stage-specific events.
5122) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, Sevignani C, Wentzel E, Furth EE, Lee WM, Enders GH, Mendell JT, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
5124) [PubMed]He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D, Goodson S, Powers S, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Hannon GJ, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
5127) The tumor suppressor microRNA let-7 represses the HMGA2 oncogene.
5129) Epigenetic activation of tumor suppressor microRNAs in human cancer cells.
5134) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
5138) Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis.
5139) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
5141) In an elegant set of genetic experiments in mice, two groups have shown that mutating a single recognition site for miR-155 in the 3-UTR of AID can partially phenocopy the consequences of miR-155 deletion (Dorsett et al., 2008; Teng et al., 2008).Another notable member of the family of oncogenic miRNAs is the miR-17~92 cluster.
5142) Its 3′UTR contains multiple binding sites for miRNAs encoded by miR-17~92 and, consistent with Bim being a direct target of miR-17~92, its levels are increased in miR-17~92 –null pre-B cells and reduced in B cell from mice overexpressing miR-17~92.
5143) In addition, various let-7 genes are located at chromosomal sites deleted in a variety of human cancers (Calin et al., 2004).
5144) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5145) The transcription of both loci appears to be directly regulated by p53 via binding to conserved sites in the respective promoters (Chang et al., 2007; Corney et al., 2007; He et al., 2007a; Raver-Shapira et al., 2007; Tarasov et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2006).
5146) Several cell biological processes, including those controlling adhesion, migration and invasion, are involved in allowing primary tumor cells to leave their original location and move to another site in the body.
5148) [PubMed]Calin GA, Sevignani C, Dumitru CD, Hyslop T, Noch E, Yendamuri S, Shimizu M, Rattan S, Bullrich F, Negrini M, et al. Human microRNA genes are frequently located at fragile sites and genomic regions involved in cancers.
5150) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y, Weng Z, et al. A global map of p53 transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome.
5151) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
5152) More subtle miRNA mutations could reduce or eliminate binding to key targets or even create seed sequences to target a new set of mRNAs, thereby altering the balance of critical growth regulatory proteins.
5153) Taken together, the available data provide a compelling case that alterations in miRNA-mRNA regulation can promote tumor development.As is true for protein-coding genes associated with cancer, the most convincing evidence linking miRNAs to tumorigenesis comes from genetic alterations in cancer cells.
5155) While miR-17~92 deregulation does not appear to be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis per se, transgenic mice over-expressing this cluster in lymphocyte progenitors cells develop a lymphoproliferative disorder affecting both B and T cells that eventually results in autoimmunity (Xiao et al., 2008).
5156) In contrast, mice carrying a homozygous deletion of the miR-17~92 locus exhibit premature death of B cells at the pro-B/pre-B stage, resulting in lymphopenia (Ventura et al., 2008).While the full spectrum of genes regulated by the six miRNAs encoded by the miR-17~92 cluster is still unknown, one candidate, the pro-apoptotic gene Bim, has been proposed to be a likely mediator of the B cell phenotype in miR-17~92-null and in miR-17~92 transgenic mice (Ventura et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 2008).
5157) Bim belongs to the family of pro-apoptotic BH3 only proteins, and has long been known to be a critical regulator of B cell survival (Bouillet et al., 1999; Bouillet et al., 2002) and a potent tumor suppressor gene in the Eμ-Myc model of B cell lymphoma (Egle et al., 2004; Hemann et al., 2005).
5158) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
5159) Mouse knock-out studies have not been reported for any let-7 family members, and, given the potential for functional overlap within this family, it may be a while before it is clear whether loss of let-7 function in the mouse can promote tumorigenesis.A series of recent reports has explored the regulation of miRNAs by tumor suppressor genes.
5160) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
5161) The transcription of both loci appears to be directly regulated by p53 via binding to conserved sites in the respective promoters (Chang et al., 2007; Corney et al., 2007; He et al., 2007a; Raver-Shapira et al., 2007; Tarasov et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2006).
5163) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
5164) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
5165) What begun sixteen years ago as a peculiar discovery in the simple worm has already gone a long way to change the way we think of gene regulation.
5168) MicroRNAs 17–5p-20a-106a control monocytopoiesis through AML1 targeting and M-CSF receptor upregulation.
5175) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Petrocca F, Visone R, Onelli MR, Shah MH, Nicoloso MS, de Martino I, Iliopoulos D, Pilozzi E, Liu CG, Negrini M, et al. E2F1-regulated microRNAs impair TGFbeta-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in gastric cancer.
5178) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Schulte JH, Horn S, Otto T, Samans B, Heukamp LC, Eilers UC, Krause M, Astrahantseff K, Klein-Hitpass L, Buettner R, et al. MYCN regulates oncogenic MicroRNAs in neuroblastoma.
5184) Twist, a master regulator of morphogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis.
5185) [PubMed]Yu F, Yao H, Zhu P, Zhang X, Pan Q, Gong C, Huang Y, Hu X, Su F, Lieberman J, et al. let-7 regulates self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells.
5186) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
5190) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Chang TC, Wentzel EA, Kent OA, Ramachandran K, Mullendore M, Lee KH, Feldmann G, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Lowenstein CJ, et al. Transactivation of miR-34a by p53 broadly influences gene expression and promotes apoptosis.
5192) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Cimmino A, Calin GA, Fabbri M, Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Shimizu M, Wojcik SE, Aqeilan RI, Zupo S, Dono M, et al. miR-15 and miR-16 induce apoptosis by targeting BCL2.
5197) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, Sevignani C, Wentzel E, Furth EE, Lee WM, Enders GH, Mendell JT, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
5198) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dorsett Y, McBride KM, Jankovic M, Gazumyan A, Thai TH, Robbiani DF, Di Virgilio M, San-Martin BR, Heidkamp G, Schwickert TA, et al. MicroRNA-155 suppresses activation-induced cytidine deaminase-mediated Myc-Igh translocation.
5201) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Elmen J, Lindow M, Schutz S, Lawrence M, Petri A, Obad S, Lindholm M, Hedtjarn M, Hansen HF, Berger U, et al. LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates.
5203) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Fontana L, Pelosi E, Greco P, Racanicchi S, Testa U, Liuzzi F, Croce CM, Brunetti E, Grignani F, Peschle C.
5206) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
5210) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Petrocca F, Visone R, Onelli MR, Shah MH, Nicoloso MS, de Martino I, Iliopoulos D, Pilozzi E, Liu CG, Negrini M, et al. E2F1-regulated microRNAs impair TGFbeta-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in gastric cancer.
5211) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Raver-Shapira N, Marciano E, Meiri E, Spector Y, Rosenfeld N, Moskovits N, Bentwich Z, Oren M.
5212) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Rosenfeld N, Aharonov R, Meiri E, Rosenwald S, Spector Y, Zepeniuk M, Benjamin H, Shabes N, Tabak S, Levy A, et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin.
5213) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Schulte JH, Horn S, Otto T, Samans B, Heukamp LC, Eilers UC, Krause M, Astrahantseff K, Klein-Hitpass L, Buettner R, et al. MYCN regulates oncogenic MicroRNAs in neuroblastoma.
5220) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
5221) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y, Weng Z, et al. A global map of p53 transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome.
5222) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Yanaihara N, Caplen N, Bowman E, Seike M, Kumamoto K, Yi M, Stephens RM, Okamoto A, Yokota J, Tanaka T, et al. Unique microRNA molecular profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
5223) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
5224) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
5228) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Chang TC, Wentzel EA, Kent OA, Ramachandran K, Mullendore M, Lee KH, Feldmann G, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Lowenstein CJ, et al. Transactivation of miR-34a by p53 broadly influences gene expression and promotes apoptosis.
5230) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Cimmino A, Calin GA, Fabbri M, Iorio MV, Ferracin M, Shimizu M, Wojcik SE, Aqeilan RI, Zupo S, Dono M, et al. miR-15 and miR-16 induce apoptosis by targeting BCL2.
5235) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, Sevignani C, Wentzel E, Furth EE, Lee WM, Enders GH, Mendell JT, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
5236) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dorsett Y, McBride KM, Jankovic M, Gazumyan A, Thai TH, Robbiani DF, Di Virgilio M, San-Martin BR, Heidkamp G, Schwickert TA, et al. MicroRNA-155 suppresses activation-induced cytidine deaminase-mediated Myc-Igh translocation.
5239) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Elmen J, Lindow M, Schutz S, Lawrence M, Petri A, Obad S, Lindholm M, Hedtjarn M, Hansen HF, Berger U, et al. LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates.
5241) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Fontana L, Pelosi E, Greco P, Racanicchi S, Testa U, Liuzzi F, Croce CM, Brunetti E, Grignani F, Peschle C.
5244) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
5248) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Petrocca F, Visone R, Onelli MR, Shah MH, Nicoloso MS, de Martino I, Iliopoulos D, Pilozzi E, Liu CG, Negrini M, et al. E2F1-regulated microRNAs impair TGFbeta-dependent cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in gastric cancer.
5249) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Raver-Shapira N, Marciano E, Meiri E, Spector Y, Rosenfeld N, Moskovits N, Bentwich Z, Oren M.
5250) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Rosenfeld N, Aharonov R, Meiri E, Rosenwald S, Spector Y, Zepeniuk M, Benjamin H, Shabes N, Tabak S, Levy A, et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin.
5251) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Schulte JH, Horn S, Otto T, Samans B, Heukamp LC, Eilers UC, Krause M, Astrahantseff K, Klein-Hitpass L, Buettner R, et al. MYCN regulates oncogenic MicroRNAs in neuroblastoma.
5258) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
5259) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y, Weng Z, et al. A global map of p53 transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome.
5260) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Yanaihara N, Caplen N, Bowman E, Seike M, Kumamoto K, Yi M, Stephens RM, Okamoto A, Yokota J, Tanaka T, et al. Unique microRNA molecular profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
5261) The human genome contains a dozen of let-7 family members, organized in eight different loci (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/cgi-bin/sequences/mirna_summary.pl?fam=MIPF0000002).
5263) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
5264) Such binding inhibits the translation and reduces the stability of the target mRNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein (reviewed in Eulalio et al., 2008)).
5265) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5266) By contrast, the physical deletion or epigenetic silencing of a miRNA that normally functions to repress expression of one or more oncogenes might lead to increased protein expression and gain of oncogenic potency.
5267) More subtle miRNA mutations could reduce or eliminate binding to key targets or even create seed sequences to target a new set of mRNAs, thereby altering the balance of critical growth regulatory proteins.
5268) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5269) Taken together, the available data provide a compelling case that alterations in miRNA-mRNA regulation can promote tumor development.As is true for protein-coding genes associated with cancer, the most convincing evidence linking miRNAs to tumorigenesis comes from genetic alterations in cancer cells.
5270) Bim belongs to the family of pro-apoptotic BH3 only proteins, and has long been known to be a critical regulator of B cell survival (Bouillet et al., 1999; Bouillet et al., 2002) and a potent tumor suppressor gene in the Eμ-Myc model of B cell lymphoma (Egle et al., 2004; Hemann et al., 2005).
5271) Let-7 genes can also be directly repressed by the c-Myc oncoprotein (Chang et al., 2008) and their precursor RNAs subjected to inhibition of further processing by lin-28 (Newman et al., 2008; Rybak et al., 2008; Viswanathan et al., 2008).
5272) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5273) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
5274) A clearer picture will likely emerge as the efforts to re-sequence the cancer genome reveal the true frequency of mutations in miRNAs and in their target sequences in protein-coding genes (although the latter will require specific analysis of the 3′ UTR regions).
5275) Such binding inhibits the translation and reduces the stability of the target mRNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein (reviewed in Eulalio et al., 2008)).
5276) More subtle miRNA mutations could reduce or eliminate binding to key targets or even create seed sequences to target a new set of mRNAs, thereby altering the balance of critical growth regulatory proteins.
5277) Its 3′UTR contains multiple binding sites for miRNAs encoded by miR-17~92 and, consistent with Bim being a direct target of miR-17~92, its levels are increased in miR-17~92 –null pre-B cells and reduced in B cell from mice overexpressing miR-17~92.
5278) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5279) The transcription of both loci appears to be directly regulated by p53 via binding to conserved sites in the respective promoters (Chang et al., 2007; Corney et al., 2007; He et al., 2007a; Raver-Shapira et al., 2007; Tarasov et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2006).
5280) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y, Weng Z, et al. A global map of p53 transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome.
5281) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5282) These range from genomic and gene expression alterations affecting miRNA genes in human cancers to observations in genetically-engineered mouse models of the disease.
5283) Beginning with the work of Croce and colleagues in 2002 (Calin et al., 2002), who showed that a pair of neighboring miRNAs are frequently focally deleted in human chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; see below), there are now several examples in which miRNA genes are either lost or amplified in tumors (Reviewed in Calin and Croce, 2006).
5285) miR-17~92 is also frequently over-expressed in several other human cancers, including lung cancers (Hayashita et al., 2005), hepatocarcinomas (Connolly et al., 2008), neuroblastomas (Schulte et al., 2008), and colorectal cancers (He et al., 2005).
5286) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
5287) An interesting observation in this regard is that in New Zealand Black mice (NZB), a mouse strain that shows a strong predisposition to the development of a B lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) reminiscent of human CLL, a very similar base change in pre-miR-16-1 has been linked to the development of LPD (Raveche et al., 2007).It appears that the tumor suppressive activity of miR-15a~16-1 is not limited to B cells.
5289) The human genome contains a dozen of let-7 family members, organized in eight different loci (http://microrna.sanger.ac.uk/cgi-bin/sequences/mirna_summary.pl?fam=MIPF0000002).
5290) Consistent with a role in inhibiting tumor development in humans, reduced levels of multiple members of the let-7 family are frequently observed in lung cancers, where they correlate with poor prognosis (Takamizawa et al., 2004; Yanaihara et al., 2006).
5291) In addition, various let-7 genes are located at chromosomal sites deleted in a variety of human cancers (Calin et al., 2004).
5292) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
5297) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Elmen J, Lindow M, Schutz S, Lawrence M, Petri A, Obad S, Lindholm M, Hedtjarn M, Hansen HF, Berger U, et al. LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates.
5298) A polycistronic microRNA cluster, miR-17–92, is overexpressed in human lung cancers and enhances cell proliferation.
5299) [PubMed]He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D, Goodson S, Powers S, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Hannon GJ, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
5300) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
5302) Epigenetic activation of tumor suppressor microRNAs in human cancer cells.
5303) [PubMed]Takamizawa J, Konishi H, Yanagisawa K, Tomida S, Osada H, Endoh H, Harano T, Yatabe Y, Nagino M, Nimura Y, et al. Reduced expression of the let-7 microRNAs in human lung cancers in association with shortened postoperative survival.
5307) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Wei CL, Wu Q, Vega VB, Chiu KP, Ng P, Zhang T, Shahab A, Yong HC, Fu Y, Weng Z, et al. A global map of p53 transcription-factor binding sites in the human genome.
5308) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
5310) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5311) While Bim appears to be a functionally relevant target of miR-17~92, the expression of many other genes is likely to be controlled by this cluster, and many other putative targets have been identified (Dews et al., 2006; Fontana et al., 2008; Fontana et al., 2007; Lu et al., 2007; Petrocca et al., 2008).Go to:miRNAs as tumor suppressorsSeveral miRNAs have been implicated as tumor suppressors based on their physical deletion or reduced expression in human cancer.
5312) Several cell biological processes, including those controlling adhesion, migration and invasion, are involved in allowing primary tumor cells to leave their original location and move to another site in the body.
5313) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
5315) MicroRNAs 17–5p-20a-106a control monocytopoiesis through AML1 targeting and M-CSF receptor upregulation.
5317) Functional studies performed in cancer cell lines or mouse models of the disease have provided further support for a direct role of a subset of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis.
5319) Reduced expression of miR-34b/miR-34c has been reported in breast and non-small cell lung cancer cell lines (Bommer et al., 2007; Calin et al., 2004).
5320) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
5321) Based on their differential expression in non-metastatic versus metastatic breast cancer cell lines, miR-126, miR-206 and miR-335 were also proposed to be inhibitors of tumor progression (Tavazoie et al., 2008).
5324) Such binding inhibits the translation and reduces the stability of the target mRNA, leading to decreased expression of the target protein (reviewed in Eulalio et al., 2008)).
5325) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
5326) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5327) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
5328) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5329) These range from genomic and gene expression alterations affecting miRNA genes in human cancers to observations in genetically-engineered mouse models of the disease.
5330) Functional studies performed in cancer cell lines or mouse models of the disease have provided further support for a direct role of a subset of these miRNAs in tumorigenesis.
5331) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
5333) In an elegant set of genetic experiments in mice, two groups have shown that mutating a single recognition site for miR-155 in the 3-UTR of AID can partially phenocopy the consequences of miR-155 deletion (Dorsett et al., 2008; Teng et al., 2008).Another notable member of the family of oncogenic miRNAs is the miR-17~92 cluster.
5334) miR-17~92 is also frequently over-expressed in several other human cancers, including lung cancers (Hayashita et al., 2005), hepatocarcinomas (Connolly et al., 2008), neuroblastomas (Schulte et al., 2008), and colorectal cancers (He et al., 2005).
5335) While miR-17~92 deregulation does not appear to be sufficient to initiate tumorigenesis per se, transgenic mice over-expressing this cluster in lymphocyte progenitors cells develop a lymphoproliferative disorder affecting both B and T cells that eventually results in autoimmunity (Xiao et al., 2008).
5336) In contrast, mice carrying a homozygous deletion of the miR-17~92 locus exhibit premature death of B cells at the pro-B/pre-B stage, resulting in lymphopenia (Ventura et al., 2008).While the full spectrum of genes regulated by the six miRNAs encoded by the miR-17~92 cluster is still unknown, one candidate, the pro-apoptotic gene Bim, has been proposed to be a likely mediator of the B cell phenotype in miR-17~92-null and in miR-17~92 transgenic mice (Ventura et al., 2008; Xiao et al., 2008).
5337) Its 3′UTR contains multiple binding sites for miRNAs encoded by miR-17~92 and, consistent with Bim being a direct target of miR-17~92, its levels are increased in miR-17~92 –null pre-B cells and reduced in B cell from mice overexpressing miR-17~92.
5338) However, in none of these cases has the definitive in vivo loss-of-function experiment been performed via gene targeting in the mouse.The miR-15a~16-1 cluster of miRNAs has recently emerged as an excellent candidate to be the long sought-after tumor suppressor gene on 13q14.
5339) This mutation has been linked to a reduced expression of miR-16-1, possibly due to less efficient processing of the precursor RNA, but large scale studies are needed to determine whether this is indeed a cancer-predisposing mutation.
5340) An interesting observation in this regard is that in New Zealand Black mice (NZB), a mouse strain that shows a strong predisposition to the development of a B lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) reminiscent of human CLL, a very similar base change in pre-miR-16-1 has been linked to the development of LPD (Raveche et al., 2007).It appears that the tumor suppressive activity of miR-15a~16-1 is not limited to B cells.
5342) In the same study, the therapeutic potential of reconstituting expression of this cluster was illustrated by the significant regression of prostatic tumor xenografts upon intra-tumoral delivery of miR-15a and miR-16-1.
5343) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
5344) Let-7 genes can also be directly repressed by the c-Myc oncoprotein (Chang et al., 2008) and their precursor RNAs subjected to inhibition of further processing by lin-28 (Newman et al., 2008; Rybak et al., 2008; Viswanathan et al., 2008).
5345) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5346) Mouse knock-out studies have not been reported for any let-7 family members, and, given the potential for functional overlap within this family, it may be a while before it is clear whether loss of let-7 function in the mouse can promote tumorigenesis.A series of recent reports has explored the regulation of miRNAs by tumor suppressor genes.
5347) The transcription of both loci appears to be directly regulated by p53 via binding to conserved sites in the respective promoters (Chang et al., 2007; Corney et al., 2007; He et al., 2007a; Raver-Shapira et al., 2007; Tarasov et al., 2007; Wei et al., 2006).
5350) Ectopic expression of miR-10b in non-metastatic breast cancer cell lines promotes cellular invasiveness and the metastatic spread of transplanted tumors, at least in part as a consequence of the direct repression of the homeobox protein HOXD10 (Ma et al., 2007).
5351) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
5352) Indeed, over-expression of these miRNAs can inhibit metastasis in a cell transplantation model and reduced expression of miR-126 and miR-335 correlates with poor metastasis-free survival of breast cancer patients (Tavazoie et al., 2008).Go to:Global deregulation of miRNAs in cancerIn this review, we have focused on the role of specific miRNAs in tumorigenesis, an already extensive and rapidly expanding list.
5353) However, recent work has also revealed intriguing changes in the global state of miRNA expression in cancer.
5354) Specifically, miRNA expression profiling experiments have demonstrated that most (although not all) miRNAs are under-expressed in tumor tissue compared to normal (Lu et al., 2005).
5355) While it is possible that this phenomenon reflects the less differentiated state of the tumor cells and/or their higher proliferation rate, one alternative explanation is that reduced miRNA levels are selected for during tumorigenesis because this itself provide some proliferative or survival advantage.
5357) Finally, a recent study has demonstrated a widespread transcriptional silencing of miRNAs by c-Myc (Chang et al., 2008), suggesting that this might contribute to its potent oncogenic activity.Independent of the functional consequences of miRNA expression patterns in cancer, miRNA profiles have value as diagnostic and prognostic markers of the disease.
5359) A clearer picture will likely emerge as the efforts to re-sequence the cancer genome reveal the true frequency of mutations in miRNAs and in their target sequences in protein-coding genes (although the latter will require specific analysis of the 3′ UTR regions).
5361) As increasingly effective pharmacological means to modulate miRNA activities are currently being developed (Elmen et al., 2008a; Elmen et al., 2008b; Krutzfeldt et al., 2005), identifying miRNAs that are essential for tumor maintenance or for metastasis might provide exciting new therapeutic opportunities.
5362) What begun sixteen years ago as a peculiar discovery in the simple worm has already gone a long way to change the way we think of gene regulation.
5364) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
5367) Multiple proto-oncogene activations in avian leukosis virus-induced lymphomas: evidence for stage-specific events.
5368) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Fontana L, Pelosi E, Greco P, Racanicchi S, Testa U, Liuzzi F, Croce CM, Brunetti E, Grignani F, Peschle C.
5369) MicroRNAs 17–5p-20a-106a control monocytopoiesis through AML1 targeting and M-CSF receptor upregulation.
5371) The miR-200 family inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer cell migration by direct targeting of E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2.
5372) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Lu J, Getz G, Miska EA, Alvarez-Saavedra EA, Lamb J, Peck D, Sweet-Cordero A, Ebert BL, Mak RH, Ferrando AA, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancers.
5376) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Raver-Shapira N, Marciano E, Meiri E, Spector Y, Rosenfeld N, Moskovits N, Bentwich Z, Oren M.
5377) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Rosenfeld N, Aharonov R, Meiri E, Rosenwald S, Spector Y, Zepeniuk M, Benjamin H, Shabes N, Tabak S, Levy A, et al. MicroRNAs accurately identify cancer tissue origin.
5380) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Yanaihara N, Caplen N, Bowman E, Seike M, Kumamoto K, Yi M, Stephens RM, Okamoto A, Yokota J, Tanaka T, et al. Unique microRNA molecular profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis.
5381) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5382) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
5384) An interesting observation in this regard is that in New Zealand Black mice (NZB), a mouse strain that shows a strong predisposition to the development of a B lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) reminiscent of human CLL, a very similar base change in pre-miR-16-1 has been linked to the development of LPD (Raveche et al., 2007).It appears that the tumor suppressive activity of miR-15a~16-1 is not limited to B cells.
5386) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
5387) These studies have focused on the miRNAs regulated by p53, a tumor suppressor gene that is frequently inactivated in human cancers (reviewed in He et al., 2007b).
5389) Finally, a recent study has demonstrated a widespread transcriptional silencing of miRNAs by c-Myc (Chang et al., 2008), suggesting that this might contribute to its potent oncogenic activity.Independent of the functional consequences of miRNA expression patterns in cancer, miRNA profiles have value as diagnostic and prognostic markers of the disease.
5390) As increasingly effective pharmacological means to modulate miRNA activities are currently being developed (Elmen et al., 2008a; Elmen et al., 2008b; Krutzfeldt et al., 2005), identifying miRNAs that are essential for tumor maintenance or for metastasis might provide exciting new therapeutic opportunities.
5391) [PubMed]Bommer GT, Gerin I, Feng Y, Kaczorowski AJ, Kuick R, Love RE, Zhai Y, Giordano TJ, Qin ZS, Moore BB, et al. p53-mediated activation of miRNA34 candidate tumor-suppressor genes.
5392) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
5394) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Chang TC, Wentzel EA, Kent OA, Ramachandran K, Mullendore M, Lee KH, Feldmann G, Yamakuchi M, Ferlito M, Lowenstein CJ, et al. Transactivation of miR-34a by p53 broadly influences gene expression and promotes apoptosis.
5395) Multiple proto-oncogene activations in avian leukosis virus-induced lymphomas: evidence for stage-specific events.
5396) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dews M, Homayouni A, Yu D, Murphy D, Sevignani C, Wentzel E, Furth EE, Lee WM, Enders GH, Mendell JT, et al. Augmentation of tumor angiogenesis by a Myc-activated microRNA cluster.
5397) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Dorsett Y, McBride KM, Jankovic M, Gazumyan A, Thai TH, Robbiani DF, Di Virgilio M, San-Martin BR, Heidkamp G, Schwickert TA, et al. MicroRNA-155 suppresses activation-induced cytidine deaminase-mediated Myc-Igh translocation.
5399) Epigenetic activation of tumor suppressor microRNAs in human cancer cells.
5402) As the deregulation of these very same processes are hallmarks of cancer, it has been speculated for some time that mutations affecting miRNAs and/or their functional interaction with oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes might also participate to tumorigenesis.
5403) Moreover, because miRNAs can coordinately target multiple mRNAs, they could influence the activity of numerous proteins (for example, in a particular pathway) and exert more extensive effects.In this review, we summarize recent findings that now overwhelmingly support an important role for these tiny RNAs in controlling cell transformation and tumor progression as well as the critical questions that remain to be answered.Go to:A plethora of possible oncogenic mechanismsBecause miRNAs act by repressing gene expression through direct base-pairing interactions with their target mRNAs, there are several possible mechanisms through which miRNAs could affect tumorigenesis.
5404) Overexpression, amplification or loss of epigenetic silencing of a gene encoding a miRNA that targets a (or multiple) tumor suppressor gene(s) could inhibit the activity of an anti-oncogenic pathway.
5405) By contrast, the physical deletion or epigenetic silencing of a miRNA that normally functions to repress expression of one or more oncogenes might lead to increased protein expression and gain of oncogenic potency.
5406) Seed-match sequences of target mRNAs could also be the sites of mutation, rendering them free from the repression of a given miRNA or subject to the effects of another (Table 1).Table 1Table 1Potentially oncogenic genetic and epigenetic changes involving miRNAs or their targets.
5407) The table includes changes affecting directly the miRNA gene as well as genetic lesions in protein-coding oncogenes and tumor suppressor gene that would result in ...Although not all of these potential mechanisms have been as yet documented in human cancers, over the past half-dozen years a veritable flood of reports have linked miRNAs to tumor development in one fashion or another.
5408) Similar to the miRNA field as a whole, the discovery of the physiologically relevant targets of these cancer-associated miRNAs is still lagging, but here, too, there has been recent progress with interesting candidate targets emerging.Go to:miRNAs as OncogenesmiRNAs that are amplified or over-expressed in cancer could function as oncogenes, and a number of putative oncogenic miRNAs have been proposed.
5412) In an elegant set of genetic experiments in mice, two groups have shown that mutating a single recognition site for miR-155 in the 3-UTR of AID can partially phenocopy the consequences of miR-155 deletion (Dorsett et al., 2008; Teng et al., 2008).Another notable member of the family of oncogenic miRNAs is the miR-17~92 cluster.
5413) In an important in vivo test of the oncogenic potential of miR-17~92, He et al. demonstrated that a truncated version of the cluster (lacking miR-92) could cooperate with c-Myc and greatly accelerate tumorigenesis in a mouse model of B cell lymphoma (He et al., 2005).
5414) While the identity of the critical targets of these two miRNAs is still unknown, the list of oncogenes that are directly regulated by miR-15a and miR-16-1 include BCL2, CyclinD1 and WNT3A (Bonci et al., 2008; Cimmino et al., 2005).Among the most actively studied of the putative tumor suppressive miRNAs are the members of the let-7 family (reviewed in Bussing et al., 2008)).
5416) In the best example of an oncogenic mutation affecting a miRNA binding site, translocations involving the HMGA2 oncogene remove functional let-7 seed-match sequences, causing over-expression of the oncoprotein (Lee and Dutta, 2007; Mayr et al., 2007).
5417) Of note, miR-373 had been previously identified as a potential oncogene (together with miR-372) in testicular germ-cell tumors (Voorhoeve et al., 2006), although it has been proposed that the prometastatic and the oncogenic properties of this miRNA are due to the regulation of different genes (CD44 and LATS2, respectively).Studies of breast cancers have also revealed a series of miRNAs that are both under-expressed in advanced cancers and capable of inhibiting cell migration and metastatic spread.
5418) Finally, a recent study has demonstrated a widespread transcriptional silencing of miRNAs by c-Myc (Chang et al., 2008), suggesting that this might contribute to its potent oncogenic activity.Independent of the functional consequences of miRNA expression patterns in cancer, miRNA profiles have value as diagnostic and prognostic markers of the disease.
5420) [PubMed]Bonci D, Coppola V, Musumeci M, Addario A, Giuffrida R, Memeo L, D’Urso L, Pagliuca A, Biffoni M, Labbaye C, et al. The miR-15a-miR-16–1 cluster controls prostate cancer by targeting multiple oncogenic activities.
5421) Genetic and epigenetic silencing of microRNA-203 enhances ABL1 and BCR-ABL1 oncogene expression.
5422) Multiple proto-oncogene activations in avian leukosis virus-induced lymphomas: evidence for stage-specific events.
5423) [PubMed]He L, Thomson JM, Hemann MT, Hernando-Monge E, Mu D, Goodson S, Powers S, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW, Hannon GJ, et al. A microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogene.
5424) The tumor suppressor microRNA let-7 represses the HMGA2 oncogene.
5426) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Schulte JH, Horn S, Otto T, Samans B, Heukamp LC, Eilers UC, Krause M, Astrahantseff K, Klein-Hitpass L, Buettner R, et al. MYCN regulates oncogenic MicroRNAs in neuroblastoma.
5427) [PMC free article] [PubMed]Voorhoeve PM, le Sage C, Schrier M, Gillis AJ, Stoop H, Nagel R, Liu YP, van Duijse J, Drost J, Griekspoor A, et al. A genetic screen implicates miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as oncogenes in testicular germ cell tumors.
5428) Feb 20, 2009; 136(4): 586–591.doi:  10.1016/j.cell.2009.02.005PMCID: PMC3910108HHMIMSID: HHMIMS544502miRNAs and Cancer: a little RNA goes a long wayAndrea Ventura1 and Tyler Jacks2Author information ► Copyright and License information ►The publisher's final edited version of this article is available at CellSee other articles in PMC that cite the published article.Go to:IntroductionSixteen years ago in back-to-back papers in Cell, Ambros, Ruvkun and their colleagues reported that a small RNA encoded by the lin-4 locus was capable of controlling the developmental timing of the nematode C. elegans by modulating the expression of a protein-coding gene lin-14 (Lee et al., 1993; Wightman et al., 1993).
5429) Looijenga2, Reuven Agami1, Corresponding author contact information, E-mail the corresponding authorShow morehttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.037  Open ArchiveSummaryEndogenous small RNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by mechanisms conserved across metazoans.
5430) To perform genetic screens for novel functions of miRNAs, we developed a library of vectors expressing the majority of cloned human miRNAs and created corresponding DNA barcode arrays.
5431) These miRNAs neutralize p53-mediated CDK inhibition, possibly through direct inhibition of the expression of the tumor-suppressor LATS2.
5432) Relevant to carcinogenesis, it was found that let-7 inhibits RAS expression and in lung tumors negatively correlates with RAS levels (Johnson et al., 2005).
5433) For example, the joint expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase subunit (hTERT), oncogenic H-RASV12, and SV40-small t antigen combined with the suppression of p53 and p16INK4A were sufficient to render primary human fibroblasts tumorigenic (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).
5434) We characterize two miRNAs whose expression can substitute for the loss of wild-type (wt) p53 that is needed to overcome oncogene-mediated arrest and implicate their involvement in the formation of testicular germ cell tumors.ResultsmiR-Vec: A Vector-Based miRNA Expression SystemTo identify novel functions of miRNAs, we constructed a retroviral vector for miRNA expression (miR-Vec) following a previously described approach (Chen et al., 2004).
5435) To examine miRNA expression from the miR-Vec system, a miR-24 minigene-containing virus was transduced into human cells.
5436) Figure 1C shows that cells transduced with miR-Vec-24 clearly express high levels of mature miR-24, whereas little expression was detected in control-transduced cells.
5441) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5442) Using fluorescence microscopy and luciferase assays, we observed potent and specific miRNA activity expressed from each miR-Vec (Figure S2).
5443) These results demonstrate the general applicability of miR-Vec to drive functional miRNA expression.miR-Lib and miR-ArrayWe subsequently created a human miRNA expression library (miR-Lib) by cloning almost all annotated human miRNAs into our vector (Rfam release 6) (Figure S3).
5447) The position of the reproducibly upregulated miR-Vecs is indicated for each experiment.(D) The miR-371-3 genomic organization and the sequences of the mature miRNAs expressed from this locus.
5450) The expression of either miR-371&2 or miR-373 allowed cells to continue proliferating in the presence of oncogenic stress, validating the effect observed with the miR-Array.Oncogene-induced senescence is characterized by the appearance of cells with a flat morphology that express senescence associated (SA)-β-Galactosidase.
5455) We also generated BJ/ET cells expressing the RASV12-ERTAM chimera gene, which is only active when tamoxifen is added (De Vita et al., 2005), and tranduced them with either YFP-tagged wt or mutant miR-Vec-371&2 and miR-Vec-373 constructs as well as p53kd, p14ARFkd, or control vectors.
5460) To mimic the expression of the complete miR-371-373 gene cluster, we made a miR-Vec expressing all miRNAs from one cluster (miR-Vec-cluster; see Figure 3A for expression).
5461) These results demonstrate that miR-372&3 collaborate with RAS in transformation in a manner that resembles p53 inactivation.Importantly, our results so far indicate that the expression of miR-372&3 did not reduce the activity of RASV12, as these cells were still growing faster than normal cells and were tumorigenic, for which RAS activity is indispensable (Hahn et al., 1999 and Kolfschoten et al., 2005).
5462) To shed more light on this aspect, we examined the effect of miR-372&3 expression on p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimulation.
5463) SD is from three independent experiments.(D) The expression of miR-372 was detected by RPA in RNA extracts from several TGCT cell lines as well as from primary seminoma and nonseminoma tumors and from normal testis tissues.(E) In situ hybridization on a nonseminoma of mixed histology to detect miR-372&3 expression.
5464) In both miR-372&3-expressing cells, CDK2 remained active following RASV12 induction, whereas it was inhibited in the control cells (Figure 4B).
5466) In the presence of both miRNAs, and irrespective of RASV12 expression, IR induced a cell cycle arrest that was indistinguishable from control cells, whereas the suppression of p53 expression allowed, as expected, continuous DNA replication (Figure 4C and data not shown).
5470) This result is significant as no clear expression of the miR-371-3 cluster was detected in any of the somatic cell lines we tested (originating from breast, colon, lung and brain tumors) (Figure S6).TGCTs are divided into seminomas, non-seminomas, and spermatocytic-seminoma, according to their origin, clinical behavior, and chromosomal constitution (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005).
5473) Noteworthy is the fact that endogenous expression of miR-372 reached levels that are comparable to those driven by miR-Vec-372 (Figure 4D), indicating the biological relevance of our system in primary human fibroblast cells.
5476) In many of the miR-371-3 expressing seminomas and nonseminomas, miR-302a-d was undetectable (Figures S7 and S8), suggesting that miR-371-3 expression is a selective event during tumorigenesis.Interestingly, we noted a correlation between cluster expression and p53 status in the TGCT cell lines (Figure 4F).
5477) Whereas all three cluster-expressing cell lines contained high wt-p53 levels, NTera2 has low wild-type p53 levels, and NCCIT lost one p53 allele while the second allele is mutated (Burger et al., 1998).
5479) Altogether, these results strongly suggest that the expression of miR-372/3 suppresses the p53 pathway to an extent sufficient to allow oncogenic mutations to accumulate in TGCTs.We then decided to test directly the correlation between the p53 pathway and miR-372/3 expression in TGCTs.
5480) It was technically not possible to sufficiently and persistently inhibit the expression of both miR-372 and miR-373 by methylated miRNA-oligos or knockdown vectors against the loop of the precursors (as judged by miR-372 and miR-373 luciferase reporter targets; data not shown).
5484) We first looked in the p53kd cells and found p53 itself and many of its transcriptional targets to be downregulated compared to the cluster-expressing cells (Figure 5A).
5485) From the list of genes whose expression was 2- or more fold lower in the cluster-expressing cells, we used target prediction programs to find possible direct targets of miR-372&3.
5490) Listed are genes whose expression was downregulated in the p53kd cells and are known transcriptional targets of p53 as well as genes whose expression was suppressed in the cluster-expressing cells and are predicted TargetScanS targets of miRNA-372&3.
5492) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
5495) Significantly, a potent inhibition of luciferase activity was also mediated by the 3′UTR of LATS2 in either MCF-7 ectopically expressing miR-372 or in Tera1 cells but not by a construct mutated at both miR-372-predicted target sites.
5497) Further investigation should elucidate the exact role of LATS2 downregulation and the possible participation of other miR-372&3-targets in the overall observed miR effect on cellular transformation.DiscussionFunctional Genetic Screens for miRNAsWe developed a miRNA-expression vector library and a corresponding barcode array to detect miRNAs whose expression modifies a defined cellular pathway.
5499) This indicates that miRNA-372&3 do not block RASV12 signals but rather allow cells to proliferate irrespective of p53 activation and induction of p21cip1.The expression of miR-372&3 results in prevention of the CDK inhibition that is caused by the oncogenic stress response.
5500) In both primary human fibroblasts and in a TGCT-derived cell line, cells expressing miR-372&3 were insensitive to elevated levels of the cell-cycle inhibitor p21cip1.
5501) Indeed, the expression of LATS2 is directly controlled by miR-372&3, and its activity is important for RASV12-induced senescence.
5504) Altogether, these provide a strong indication that there is no selective advantage to mutate p53 during TGCT development when the miR-371-3 cluster is expressed.The potent role of miR-372&3 in cellular transformation and potentially in TGCT development raises the possibility that they may play a similar role in somatic tumors.
5505) To this end, we determined the expression of the miR-371-3 cluster in several distinct somatic tumor cell lines and found little evidence for their expression (Figure S6).
5509) It is therefore most likely that the expression of miR-371-3 in primary TGCT is not merely a remnant of their ES cell phenotype but rather a selective event during TGCT tumorigenesis.Function of miRNA372&3 in Embryonic Stem CellsOur results suggest a link between the expression of miR-372&3 in embryonic stem cells and their function in cellular proliferation in these cells.
5511) The proliferation defect in Drosophila mutants that lack miRNAs could be alleviated by loss of dacapo, the Drosophila p21cip1 homolog ( Forstemann et al., 2005 and Hatfield et al., 2005).Our results indicate that due to enhanced tolerance to oncogenic mutations, deregulated expression of miR-372&3 predisposes cells for accumulation of carcinogenic events.
5512) Thus, the expression of these miRNAs must be carefully controlled during differentiation to prevent progression to cancer.
5513) Which factors control miR-371-3 expression during differentiation and whether their activity is causally related to development of TGCTs remain to be explored.
5517) Ferrando et al.MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancersNature, 435 (2005), pp.
5520) NoguchiDown-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancersClin.
5521) However, the small number of miRNAs with a known function stresses the need for a systematic screening approach to identify more miRNA functions.The difficulties in deciphering the mechanism of action of miRNAs with a known function and deducing their activity from their sequence are largely due to the complex relationship with their target genes.
5522) In general, target genes containing sequences that are completely complementary to the miRNA will be degraded by an RNA-interference mechanism, whereas targets with partial complementary sequences at their 3′UTR will be subjected to translation inhibition and to a lesser extent also to mRNA degradation (Doench and Sharp, 2004, Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
5523) In mammals, a near-perfect complementarity between miRNAs and protein coding genes almost never exists, making it difficult to directly pinpoint relevant downstream targets of a miRNA.
5525) These programs predict dozens to hundreds of target genes per miRNA, making it difficult to directly infer the cellular pathways affected by a given miRNA.
5526) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5527) Figure 4A shows that following RASV12 stimulation, p53 was stabilized and activated, and its target gene, p21cip1, was induced in all cases, indicating an intact p53 pathway in these cells.
5528) It was technically not possible to sufficiently and persistently inhibit the expression of both miR-372 and miR-373 by methylated miRNA-oligos or knockdown vectors against the loop of the precursors (as judged by miR-372 and miR-373 luciferase reporter targets; data not shown).
5530) We first looked in the p53kd cells and found p53 itself and many of its transcriptional targets to be downregulated compared to the cluster-expressing cells (Figure 5A).
5531) From the list of genes whose expression was 2- or more fold lower in the cluster-expressing cells, we used target prediction programs to find possible direct targets of miR-372&3.
5533) Listed are genes whose expression was downregulated in the p53kd cells and are known transcriptional targets of p53 as well as genes whose expression was suppressed in the cluster-expressing cells and are predicted TargetScanS targets of miRNA-372&3.
5534) Band intensity was calculated by densitometry.(D) The 3′-UTRs of LATS2 in human (Hs), mouse (Mm), and zebrafish (Dr) are shown, and the predicted miR-372&3 target sequences are marked.(E) The indicated vectors were transfected in miR-372&3-positive (Tera1) and negative (MCF-7) cell lines.
5535) To further substantiate LATS2 as a direct target of miR372&3, we cloned its 3′UTR downstream of the firefly luciferase gene (pGL3-LATS2).
5536) Significantly, a potent inhibition of luciferase activity was also mediated by the 3′UTR of LATS2 in either MCF-7 ectopically expressing miR-372 or in Tera1 cells but not by a construct mutated at both miR-372-predicted target sites.
5538) Therefore, these results point to LATS2 as a mediator of the miR-372 and miR-373 effects on cell proliferation and tumorigenicity, although they do not exclude the participation of other direct miR-targets, such as Suv39-H1, in these processes.
5539) Further investigation should elucidate the exact role of LATS2 downregulation and the possible participation of other miR-372&3-targets in the overall observed miR effect on cellular transformation.DiscussionFunctional Genetic Screens for miRNAsWe developed a miRNA-expression vector library and a corresponding barcode array to detect miRNAs whose expression modifies a defined cellular pathway.
5540) However, further investigation is required to demonstrate the exact mechanism of LATS2 action and whether there are other targets of miR-372&3, such as Suv39H1, that are relevant to this phenotype.Correlations to Other miRNAsBased on the seed sequence, the miR-372&3 gene family also includes miR-93 and miR-302a-e.
5542) Indeed, preliminary results show that similar to miR-372&3, albeit with minor differences, both miR-93 and miR-302a-e can effectively target the LATS2 3′UTR and bypass oncogene-induced senescence (manuscript in preparation).Role of miR372&3 in TGCT DevelopmentOur results suggest that during transformation, the activities of miR-372&3 circumvented the need to mutate p53, leading to a DNA-damage-sensitive transformed phenotype.
5543) The genes that decreased 2-fold or more were further screened for possible miR-372/3 target sites using a local version of the TargetScan algorithm (Lewis et al., 2003) with default parameters (http://www.mekentosj.com/targetscanner).AcknowledgmentsWe thank Martijn Kedde and Hugo Horlings for technical help, Ron Kerkhoven and Mike Heimerikx for support in microarray analysis, Steve de Jong for reagents, Wigard Kloosterman for help in miRNA-in situ protocol, J.
5548) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
5553) In a screen for miRNAs that cooperate with oncogenes in cellular transformation, we identified miR-372 and miR-373, each permitting proliferation and tumorigenesis of primary human cells that harbor both oncogenic RAS and active wild-type p53.
5554) These miRNAs neutralize p53-mediated CDK inhibition, possibly through direct inhibition of the expression of the tumor-suppressor LATS2.
5555) We provide evidence that these miRNAs are potential novel oncogenes participating in the development of human testicular germ cell tumors by numbing the p53 pathway, thus allowing tumorigenic growth in the presence of wild-type p53.IntroductionSince their discovery, the functions of only a handful of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been determined (recently reviewed in Zamore and Haley, 2005).
5556) Relevant to carcinogenesis, it was found that let-7 inhibits RAS expression and in lung tumors negatively correlates with RAS levels (Johnson et al., 2005).
5558) For example, the joint expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase subunit (hTERT), oncogenic H-RASV12, and SV40-small t antigen combined with the suppression of p53 and p16INK4A were sufficient to render primary human fibroblasts tumorigenic (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).
5559) Recently, these neoplastic transformation assays were used to uncover novel human tumor suppressor genes (Kolfschoten et al., 2005 and Westbrook et al., 2005).Moreover, oncogenes such as H-RASV12 provoke a stress response in primary cells that results in an irreversible growth arrest, termed premature senescence (Serrano et al., 1997).
5561) The elimination of this protective mechanism by, for example, the suppression of the p53 and p16INK4A pathways permits continued proliferation of the modified primary cells in the presence of the oncogenic event, consequently leading to tumorigenicity (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).Here, we use this model system to perform a functional genetic screen to identify miRNAs that act as oncogenes in tumorigenesis.
5562) We characterize two miRNAs whose expression can substitute for the loss of wild-type (wt) p53 that is needed to overcome oncogene-mediated arrest and implicate their involvement in the formation of testicular germ cell tumors.ResultsmiR-Vec: A Vector-Based miRNA Expression SystemTo identify novel functions of miRNAs, we constructed a retroviral vector for miRNA expression (miR-Vec) following a previously described approach (Chen et al., 2004).
5563) This escape from oncogene-induced senescence is a prerequisite for full transformation into tumor cells.
5564) To identify miRNAs that can interfere with this process and thus might contribute to the development of tumor cells, we transduced BJ/ET fibroblasts with miR-Lib and subsequently transduced them with either RASV12 or a control vector (Figure 2B).
5565) The average and standard deviation of three independent dishes is shown.(E) The cluster, p53kd, and control cell populations from (C) were injected subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and tumor growth was scored 5 weeks later.Figure optionsExpression of miR-372 and miR-373 Transforms Primary Human CellsSuppression of cellular senescence is essential for tumorigenesis.
5568) These results demonstrate that miR-372&3 collaborate with RAS in transformation in a manner that resembles p53 inactivation.Importantly, our results so far indicate that the expression of miR-372&3 did not reduce the activity of RASV12, as these cells were still growing faster than normal cells and were tumorigenic, for which RAS activity is indispensable (Hahn et al., 1999 and Kolfschoten et al., 2005).
5569) SD is from three independent experiments.(D) The expression of miR-372 was detected by RPA in RNA extracts from several TGCT cell lines as well as from primary seminoma and nonseminoma tumors and from normal testis tissues.(E) In situ hybridization on a nonseminoma of mixed histology to detect miR-372&3 expression.
5570) The EC component of the tumor was morphologically determined using HE-counter staining and by immunohistochemistry with anti-CD30 and OCT3/4 antibodies of the next sections.(F) Summary of the p53 status in several TGCT cell lines and primary seminomas (in the latter, only exons five to eight were examined).(G) NCCIT cells were cotransfected with H2B-GFP and the indicated constructs.
5571) These results indicate that although miR-372&3 confer complete protection to oncogene-induced senescence in a manner similar to p53 inactivation, the cellular response to DNA damage remains intact.Potential Role of miR-372 and miR-373 in Human CancerBased on the above results, we hypothesized that miRNA-372&3 may participate in tumorigenesis of some tumors that retain wt p53 and are sensitive to DNA-damaging treatments.
5574) This result is significant as no clear expression of the miR-371-3 cluster was detected in any of the somatic cell lines we tested (originating from breast, colon, lung and brain tumors) (Figure S6).TGCTs are divided into seminomas, non-seminomas, and spermatocytic-seminoma, according to their origin, clinical behavior, and chromosomal constitution (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005).
5578) In many of the miR-371-3 expressing seminomas and nonseminomas, miR-302a-d was undetectable (Figures S7 and S8), suggesting that miR-371-3 expression is a selective event during tumorigenesis.Interestingly, we noted a correlation between cluster expression and p53 status in the TGCT cell lines (Figure 4F).
5579) To strengthen the p53 connection seen in the TGCT cell lines, we examined p53 mutations in exons five to eight in the primary tumors, where the majority of mutations are found.
5581) Finally, in human breast cancer, hypermethylation of the LATS2 promoter was associated with an aggressive phenotype of the tumors (Takahashi et al., 2005).
5582) Therefore, these results point to LATS2 as a mediator of the miR-372 and miR-373 effects on cell proliferation and tumorigenicity, although they do not exclude the participation of other direct miR-targets, such as Suv39-H1, in these processes.
5583) Furthermore, the miR-Lib tool can be used in a single-well format to identify growth-independent phenotypes.Collaboration of miRNA372&3 and RASV12 in TumorigenesisSustained proliferation of cells in the presence of oncogenic signals is a major leap toward tumorigenicity (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000).
5586) Altogether, these provide a strong indication that there is no selective advantage to mutate p53 during TGCT development when the miR-371-3 cluster is expressed.The potent role of miR-372&3 in cellular transformation and potentially in TGCT development raises the possibility that they may play a similar role in somatic tumors.
5587) To this end, we determined the expression of the miR-371-3 cluster in several distinct somatic tumor cell lines and found little evidence for their expression (Figure S6).
5590) It is therefore most likely that the expression of miR-371-3 in primary TGCT is not merely a remnant of their ES cell phenotype but rather a selective event during TGCT tumorigenesis.Function of miRNA372&3 in Embryonic Stem CellsOur results suggest a link between the expression of miR-372&3 in embryonic stem cells and their function in cellular proliferation in these cells.
5593) BryantThe Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferationGenes Dev., 9 (1995), pp.
5595) AgamiA genetic screen identifies PITX1 as a suppressor of RAS activity and tumorigenicityCell, 121 (2005), pp.
5597) BokemeyerMolecular determinants of treatment response in human germ cell tumorsClin.
5601) YuIdentifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinaseDevelopment, 121 (1995), pp.
5602) Furthermore, the biological effect of the downregulation depends greatly on the cellular context, which exemplifies the need to deduce miRNA functions by in vivo genetic screens in well-defined model systems.The cancerous process can be modeled by in vitro neoplastic transformation assays in primary human cells (Hahn et al., 1999).
5603) Finally, in human breast cancer, hypermethylation of the LATS2 promoter was associated with an aggressive phenotype of the tumors (Takahashi et al., 2005).
5605) Thus, the expression of these miRNAs must be carefully controlled during differentiation to prevent progression to cancer.
5607) Ferrando et al.MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancersNature, 435 (2005), pp.
5609) NoguchiDown-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancersClin.
5611) Looijenga2, Reuven Agami1, Corresponding author contact information, E-mail the corresponding authorShow morehttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.037  Open ArchiveSummaryEndogenous small RNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by mechanisms conserved across metazoans.
5612) To perform genetic screens for novel functions of miRNAs, we developed a library of vectors expressing the majority of cloned human miRNAs and created corresponding DNA barcode arrays.
5613) In a screen for miRNAs that cooperate with oncogenes in cellular transformation, we identified miR-372 and miR-373, each permitting proliferation and tumorigenesis of primary human cells that harbor both oncogenic RAS and active wild-type p53.
5614) We provide evidence that these miRNAs are potential novel oncogenes participating in the development of human testicular germ cell tumors by numbing the p53 pathway, thus allowing tumorigenic growth in the presence of wild-type p53.IntroductionSince their discovery, the functions of only a handful of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been determined (recently reviewed in Zamore and Haley, 2005).
5615) Relevant to carcinogenesis, it was found that let-7 inhibits RAS expression and in lung tumors negatively correlates with RAS levels (Johnson et al., 2005).
5616) However, the small number of miRNAs with a known function stresses the need for a systematic screening approach to identify more miRNA functions.The difficulties in deciphering the mechanism of action of miRNAs with a known function and deducing their activity from their sequence are largely due to the complex relationship with their target genes.
5617) In general, target genes containing sequences that are completely complementary to the miRNA will be degraded by an RNA-interference mechanism, whereas targets with partial complementary sequences at their 3′UTR will be subjected to translation inhibition and to a lesser extent also to mRNA degradation (Doench and Sharp, 2004, Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
5618) In mammals, a near-perfect complementarity between miRNAs and protein coding genes almost never exists, making it difficult to directly pinpoint relevant downstream targets of a miRNA.
5619) These programs predict dozens to hundreds of target genes per miRNA, making it difficult to directly infer the cellular pathways affected by a given miRNA.
5620) Furthermore, the biological effect of the downregulation depends greatly on the cellular context, which exemplifies the need to deduce miRNA functions by in vivo genetic screens in well-defined model systems.The cancerous process can be modeled by in vitro neoplastic transformation assays in primary human cells (Hahn et al., 1999).
5622) Recently, these neoplastic transformation assays were used to uncover novel human tumor suppressor genes (Kolfschoten et al., 2005 and Westbrook et al., 2005).Moreover, oncogenes such as H-RASV12 provoke a stress response in primary cells that results in an irreversible growth arrest, termed premature senescence (Serrano et al., 1997).
5623) The elimination of this protective mechanism by, for example, the suppression of the p53 and p16INK4A pathways permits continued proliferation of the modified primary cells in the presence of the oncogenic event, consequently leading to tumorigenicity (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).Here, we use this model system to perform a functional genetic screen to identify miRNAs that act as oncogenes in tumorigenesis.
5624) We characterize two miRNAs whose expression can substitute for the loss of wild-type (wt) p53 that is needed to overcome oncogene-mediated arrest and implicate their involvement in the formation of testicular germ cell tumors.ResultsmiR-Vec: A Vector-Based miRNA Expression SystemTo identify novel functions of miRNAs, we constructed a retroviral vector for miRNA expression (miR-Vec) following a previously described approach (Chen et al., 2004).
5625) To examine miRNA expression from the miR-Vec system, a miR-24 minigene-containing virus was transduced into human cells.
5626) Transcription of the minigene mimics the pri-miRNA, which is subsequently processed to a mature miRNA.(B) The RPA technique used to detect precursor and mature miRNAs in this study.(C) RPA was performed on RNA extracts from primary human BJ cells stably transduced with miR-Vec-24 and miR-Vec-ctrl.
5627) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5628) These results demonstrate the general applicability of miR-Vec to drive functional miRNA expression.miR-Lib and miR-ArrayWe subsequently created a human miRNA expression library (miR-Lib) by cloning almost all annotated human miRNAs into our vector (Rfam release 6) (Figure S3).
5629) In accordance, we observed an approximately 4-fold increase in miR-311 signal, indicating that our procedure is sensitive enough to detect mild growth differences (Figure 1E).Expression of miR-372 and miR-373 Protects from Oncogenic StressIn response to mitogenic signals from oncogenes such as RASV12, primary human cells undergo a growth arrest (Figure 2A) (Serrano et al., 1997).
5630) This escape from oncogene-induced senescence is a prerequisite for full transformation into tumor cells.
5631) Identification of miR-Vecs that Inhibit Oncogene-Induced Senescence(A) The effects of oncogenic RASV12 on cellular growth.(B) A flow chart of the screen.
5632) The expression of either miR-371&2 or miR-373 allowed cells to continue proliferating in the presence of oncogenic stress, validating the effect observed with the miR-Array.Oncogene-induced senescence is characterized by the appearance of cells with a flat morphology that express senescence associated (SA)-β-Galactosidase.
5634) We also generated BJ/ET cells expressing the RASV12-ERTAM chimera gene, which is only active when tamoxifen is added (De Vita et al., 2005), and tranduced them with either YFP-tagged wt or mutant miR-Vec-371&2 and miR-Vec-373 constructs as well as p53kd, p14ARFkd, or control vectors.
5635) Once RASV12 was activated, the growth advantage of cells with miR-Vec-371&2 and 373 increased dramatically, indicating that these constructs allowed growth of cells in the presence of oncogenes while the rest of the population ceased to proliferate.
5636) The average and standard deviation of three independent dishes is shown.(E) The cluster, p53kd, and control cell populations from (C) were injected subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and tumor growth was scored 5 weeks later.Figure optionsExpression of miR-372 and miR-373 Transforms Primary Human CellsSuppression of cellular senescence is essential for tumorigenesis.
5637) To mimic the expression of the complete miR-371-373 gene cluster, we made a miR-Vec expressing all miRNAs from one cluster (miR-Vec-cluster; see Figure 3A for expression).
5638) Figure 4A shows that following RASV12 stimulation, p53 was stabilized and activated, and its target gene, p21cip1, was induced in all cases, indicating an intact p53 pathway in these cells.
5639) These results indicate that although miR-372&3 confer complete protection to oncogene-induced senescence in a manner similar to p53 inactivation, the cellular response to DNA damage remains intact.Potential Role of miR-372 and miR-373 in Human CancerBased on the above results, we hypothesized that miRNA-372&3 may participate in tumorigenesis of some tumors that retain wt p53 and are sensitive to DNA-damaging treatments.
5641) In many of the miR-371-3 expressing seminomas and nonseminomas, miR-302a-d was undetectable (Figures S7 and S8), suggesting that miR-371-3 expression is a selective event during tumorigenesis.Interestingly, we noted a correlation between cluster expression and p53 status in the TGCT cell lines (Figure 4F).
5643) From the list of genes whose expression was 2- or more fold lower in the cluster-expressing cells, we used target prediction programs to find possible direct targets of miR-372&3.
5644) It was recently shown that lymphocytes from mice nullizygous for Suv39-H1 are resistant to oncogene-induced senescence (Braig et al., 2005).
5645) Listed are genes whose expression was downregulated in the p53kd cells and are known transcriptional targets of p53 as well as genes whose expression was suppressed in the cluster-expressing cells and are predicted TargetScanS targets of miRNA-372&3.
5646) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
5647) To further substantiate LATS2 as a direct target of miR372&3, we cloned its 3′UTR downstream of the firefly luciferase gene (pGL3-LATS2).
5648) We demonstrate here the power of this technology by the identification of miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as potential oncogenes that collaborate with oncogenic RAS in cellular transformation (Figure 5G).
5649) Furthermore, the miR-Lib tool can be used in a single-well format to identify growth-independent phenotypes.Collaboration of miRNA372&3 and RASV12 in TumorigenesisSustained proliferation of cells in the presence of oncogenic signals is a major leap toward tumorigenicity (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000).
5650) However, further investigation is required to demonstrate the exact mechanism of LATS2 action and whether there are other targets of miR-372&3, such as Suv39H1, that are relevant to this phenotype.Correlations to Other miRNAsBased on the seed sequence, the miR-372&3 gene family also includes miR-93 and miR-302a-e.
5652) Indeed, preliminary results show that similar to miR-372&3, albeit with minor differences, both miR-93 and miR-302a-e can effectively target the LATS2 3′UTR and bypass oncogene-induced senescence (manuscript in preparation).Role of miR372&3 in TGCT DevelopmentOur results suggest that during transformation, the activities of miR-372&3 circumvented the need to mutate p53, leading to a DNA-damage-sensitive transformed phenotype.
5653) It is therefore most likely that the expression of miR-371-3 in primary TGCT is not merely a remnant of their ES cell phenotype but rather a selective event during TGCT tumorigenesis.Function of miRNA372&3 in Embryonic Stem CellsOur results suggest a link between the expression of miR-372&3 in embryonic stem cells and their function in cellular proliferation in these cells.
5654) Nevertheless, our experiments stress the importance of a strong downregulation of factors that maintain rapid cell proliferation, as in the absence of this downregulation safeguard mechanisms against oncogene emergence are functionally impaired.Experimental ProceduresConstructspMSCV-Blast and pMSCV-YFP were made by replacing the puromycin resistance marker of pMSCV-puro (Clontech) with a PCR product encoding the blasticidin resistance gene from cDNA6/TR (invitrogen) or YFP from pEYFP-N1 (Clontech), respectively.
5656) The constructs encoding Luciferase-3′-G6PD wt and mut were a kind gift of David Bartel (Lewis et al., 2003).The miRNA minigenes were PCR amplified from genomic human DNA, cloned downstream of the CMV promoter in miR-Vec, and sequence verified.
5658) The genes that decreased 2-fold or more were further screened for possible miR-372/3 target sites using a local version of the TargetScan algorithm (Lewis et al., 2003) with default parameters (http://www.mekentosj.com/targetscanner).AcknowledgmentsWe thank Martijn Kedde and Hugo Horlings for technical help, Ron Kerkhoven and Mike Heimerikx for support in microarray analysis, Steve de Jong for reagents, Wigard Kloosterman for help in miRNA-in situ protocol, J.
5664) HammondA microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogeneNature, 435 (2005), pp.
5665) BryantThe Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferationGenes Dev., 9 (1995), pp.
5666) AgamiA genetic screen identifies PITX1 as a suppressor of RAS activity and tumorigenicityCell, 121 (2005), pp.
5667) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
5672) YuIdentifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinaseDevelopment, 121 (1995), pp.
5673) This escape from oncogene-induced senescence is a prerequisite for full transformation into tumor cells.
5674) These results show that a combined effect of RNA destruction and translation inhibition is used by miR-372&3 to silence LATS2.miR-372/3 was predicted to bind two sites in the 3′UTR of LATS2 that are highly conserved between human, mouse, and zebrafish (Figure 5D).
5675) Significantly, a potent inhibition of luciferase activity was also mediated by the 3′UTR of LATS2 in either MCF-7 ectopically expressing miR-372 or in Tera1 cells but not by a construct mutated at both miR-372-predicted target sites.
5676) The genes that decreased 2-fold or more were further screened for possible miR-372/3 target sites using a local version of the TargetScan algorithm (Lewis et al., 2003) with default parameters (http://www.mekentosj.com/targetscanner).AcknowledgmentsWe thank Martijn Kedde and Hugo Horlings for technical help, Ron Kerkhoven and Mike Heimerikx for support in microarray analysis, Steve de Jong for reagents, Wigard Kloosterman for help in miRNA-in situ protocol, J.
5677) Looijenga2, Reuven Agami1, Corresponding author contact information, E-mail the corresponding authorShow morehttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.037  Open ArchiveSummaryEndogenous small RNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by mechanisms conserved across metazoans.
5678) Furthermore, the biological effect of the downregulation depends greatly on the cellular context, which exemplifies the need to deduce miRNA functions by in vivo genetic screens in well-defined model systems.The cancerous process can be modeled by in vitro neoplastic transformation assays in primary human cells (Hahn et al., 1999).
5679) The position of the reproducibly upregulated miR-Vecs is indicated for each experiment.(D) The miR-371-3 genomic organization and the sequences of the mature miRNAs expressed from this locus.
5680) We first looked in the p53kd cells and found p53 itself and many of its transcriptional targets to be downregulated compared to the cluster-expressing cells (Figure 5A).
5681) Listed are genes whose expression was downregulated in the p53kd cells and are known transcriptional targets of p53 as well as genes whose expression was suppressed in the cluster-expressing cells and are predicted TargetScanS targets of miRNA-372&3.
5682) Further investigation should elucidate the exact role of LATS2 downregulation and the possible participation of other miR-372&3-targets in the overall observed miR effect on cellular transformation.DiscussionFunctional Genetic Screens for miRNAsWe developed a miRNA-expression vector library and a corresponding barcode array to detect miRNAs whose expression modifies a defined cellular pathway.
5684) The proliferation defect in Drosophila mutants that lack miRNAs could be alleviated by loss of dacapo, the Drosophila p21cip1 homolog ( Forstemann et al., 2005 and Hatfield et al., 2005).Our results indicate that due to enhanced tolerance to oncogenic mutations, deregulated expression of miR-372&3 predisposes cells for accumulation of carcinogenic events.
5685) Nevertheless, our experiments stress the importance of a strong downregulation of factors that maintain rapid cell proliferation, as in the absence of this downregulation safeguard mechanisms against oncogene emergence are functionally impaired.Experimental ProceduresConstructspMSCV-Blast and pMSCV-YFP were made by replacing the puromycin resistance marker of pMSCV-puro (Clontech) with a PCR product encoding the blasticidin resistance gene from cDNA6/TR (invitrogen) or YFP from pEYFP-N1 (Clontech), respectively.
5686) Agamip53-Dependent regulation of Cdc6 protein stability controls cellular proliferationMol.
5691) NoguchiDown-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancersClin.
5692) These miRNAs neutralize p53-mediated CDK inhibition, possibly through direct inhibition of the expression of the tumor-suppressor LATS2.
5693) In mammals, a near-perfect complementarity between miRNAs and protein coding genes almost never exists, making it difficult to directly pinpoint relevant downstream targets of a miRNA.
5698) Agamip53-Dependent regulation of Cdc6 protein stability controls cellular proliferationMol.
5699) ZamoreNormal microRNA maturation and germ-line stem cell maintenance requires Loquacious, a double-stranded RNA-binding domain proteinPLoS Biol., 3 (2005), p.
5702) YuIdentifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinaseDevelopment, 121 (1995), pp.
5703) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5704) These results show that a combined effect of RNA destruction and translation inhibition is used by miR-372&3 to silence LATS2.miR-372/3 was predicted to bind two sites in the 3′UTR of LATS2 that are highly conserved between human, mouse, and zebrafish (Figure 5D).
5705) ZamoreNormal microRNA maturation and germ-line stem cell maintenance requires Loquacious, a double-stranded RNA-binding domain proteinPLoS Biol., 3 (2005), p.
5707) To perform genetic screens for novel functions of miRNAs, we developed a library of vectors expressing the majority of cloned human miRNAs and created corresponding DNA barcode arrays.
5708) In a screen for miRNAs that cooperate with oncogenes in cellular transformation, we identified miR-372 and miR-373, each permitting proliferation and tumorigenesis of primary human cells that harbor both oncogenic RAS and active wild-type p53.
5709) We provide evidence that these miRNAs are potential novel oncogenes participating in the development of human testicular germ cell tumors by numbing the p53 pathway, thus allowing tumorigenic growth in the presence of wild-type p53.IntroductionSince their discovery, the functions of only a handful of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been determined (recently reviewed in Zamore and Haley, 2005).
5710) Furthermore, the biological effect of the downregulation depends greatly on the cellular context, which exemplifies the need to deduce miRNA functions by in vivo genetic screens in well-defined model systems.The cancerous process can be modeled by in vitro neoplastic transformation assays in primary human cells (Hahn et al., 1999).
5711) For example, the joint expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase subunit (hTERT), oncogenic H-RASV12, and SV40-small t antigen combined with the suppression of p53 and p16INK4A were sufficient to render primary human fibroblasts tumorigenic (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).
5712) Recently, these neoplastic transformation assays were used to uncover novel human tumor suppressor genes (Kolfschoten et al., 2005 and Westbrook et al., 2005).Moreover, oncogenes such as H-RASV12 provoke a stress response in primary cells that results in an irreversible growth arrest, termed premature senescence (Serrano et al., 1997).
5713) To examine miRNA expression from the miR-Vec system, a miR-24 minigene-containing virus was transduced into human cells.
5714) Transcription of the minigene mimics the pri-miRNA, which is subsequently processed to a mature miRNA.(B) The RPA technique used to detect precursor and mature miRNAs in this study.(C) RPA was performed on RNA extracts from primary human BJ cells stably transduced with miR-Vec-24 and miR-Vec-ctrl.
5715) These results demonstrate the general applicability of miR-Vec to drive functional miRNA expression.miR-Lib and miR-ArrayWe subsequently created a human miRNA expression library (miR-Lib) by cloning almost all annotated human miRNAs into our vector (Rfam release 6) (Figure S3).
5716) In accordance, we observed an approximately 4-fold increase in miR-311 signal, indicating that our procedure is sensitive enough to detect mild growth differences (Figure 1E).Expression of miR-372 and miR-373 Protects from Oncogenic StressIn response to mitogenic signals from oncogenes such as RASV12, primary human cells undergo a growth arrest (Figure 2A) (Serrano et al., 1997).
5719) Noteworthy is the fact that endogenous expression of miR-372 reached levels that are comparable to those driven by miR-Vec-372 (Figure 4D), indicating the biological relevance of our system in primary human fibroblast cells.
5720) Finally, in human breast cancer, hypermethylation of the LATS2 promoter was associated with an aggressive phenotype of the tumors (Takahashi et al., 2005).
5721) Band intensity was calculated by densitometry.(D) The 3′-UTRs of LATS2 in human (Hs), mouse (Mm), and zebrafish (Dr) are shown, and the predicted miR-372&3 target sequences are marked.(E) The indicated vectors were transfected in miR-372&3-positive (Tera1) and negative (MCF-7) cell lines.
5722) These results show that a combined effect of RNA destruction and translation inhibition is used by miR-372&3 to silence LATS2.miR-372/3 was predicted to bind two sites in the 3′UTR of LATS2 that are highly conserved between human, mouse, and zebrafish (Figure 5D).
5723) In both primary human fibroblasts and in a TGCT-derived cell line, cells expressing miR-372&3 were insensitive to elevated levels of the cell-cycle inhibitor p21cip1.
5726) The constructs encoding Luciferase-3′-G6PD wt and mut were a kind gift of David Bartel (Lewis et al., 2003).The miRNA minigenes were PCR amplified from genomic human DNA, cloned downstream of the CMV promoter in miR-Vec, and sequence verified.
5728) HammondA microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogeneNature, 435 (2005), pp.
5729) BryantThe Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferationGenes Dev., 9 (1995), pp.
5731) BartelConserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are microRNA targetsCell, 120 (2005), pp.
5732) Ferrando et al.MicroRNA expression profiles classify human cancersNature, 435 (2005), pp.
5733) BokemeyerMolecular determinants of treatment response in human germ cell tumorsClin.
5736) NoguchiDown-regulation of LATS1 and LATS2 mRNA expression by promoter hypermethylation and its association with biologically aggressive phenotype in human breast cancersClin.
5739) Figure 1C shows that cells transduced with miR-Vec-24 clearly express high levels of mature miR-24, whereas little expression was detected in control-transduced cells.
5742) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5743) To identify miRNAs that can interfere with this process and thus might contribute to the development of tumor cells, we transduced BJ/ET fibroblasts with miR-Lib and subsequently transduced them with either RASV12 or a control vector (Figure 2B).
5748) We also generated BJ/ET cells expressing the RASV12-ERTAM chimera gene, which is only active when tamoxifen is added (De Vita et al., 2005), and tranduced them with either YFP-tagged wt or mutant miR-Vec-371&2 and miR-Vec-373 constructs as well as p53kd, p14ARFkd, or control vectors.
5749) The average and standard deviation of three independent dishes is shown.(E) The cluster, p53kd, and control cell populations from (C) were injected subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and tumor growth was scored 5 weeks later.Figure optionsExpression of miR-372 and miR-373 Transforms Primary Human CellsSuppression of cellular senescence is essential for tumorigenesis.
5751) In both miR-372&3-expressing cells, CDK2 remained active following RASV12 induction, whereas it was inhibited in the control cells (Figure 4B).
5752) In the presence of both miRNAs, and irrespective of RASV12 expression, IR induced a cell cycle arrest that was indistinguishable from control cells, whereas the suppression of p53 expression allowed, as expected, continuous DNA replication (Figure 4C and data not shown).
5754) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
5757) Indeed, the expression of LATS2 is directly controlled by miR-372&3, and its activity is important for RASV12-induced senescence.
5758) Thus, the expression of these miRNAs must be carefully controlled during differentiation to prevent progression to cancer.
5759) Which factors control miR-371-3 expression during differentiation and whether their activity is causally related to development of TGCTs remain to be explored.
5760) Agamip53-Dependent regulation of Cdc6 protein stability controls cellular proliferationMol.
5761) BryantThe Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferationGenes Dev., 9 (1995), pp.
5763) SD is from three independent experiments.(D) The expression of miR-372 was detected by RPA in RNA extracts from several TGCT cell lines as well as from primary seminoma and nonseminoma tumors and from normal testis tissues.(E) In situ hybridization on a nonseminoma of mixed histology to detect miR-372&3 expression.
5764) The EC component of the tumor was morphologically determined using HE-counter staining and by immunohistochemistry with anti-CD30 and OCT3/4 antibodies of the next sections.(F) Summary of the p53 status in several TGCT cell lines and primary seminomas (in the latter, only exons five to eight were examined).(G) NCCIT cells were cotransfected with H2B-GFP and the indicated constructs.
5767) This result is significant as no clear expression of the miR-371-3 cluster was detected in any of the somatic cell lines we tested (originating from breast, colon, lung and brain tumors) (Figure S6).TGCTs are divided into seminomas, non-seminomas, and spermatocytic-seminoma, according to their origin, clinical behavior, and chromosomal constitution (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005).
5769) In many of the miR-371-3 expressing seminomas and nonseminomas, miR-302a-d was undetectable (Figures S7 and S8), suggesting that miR-371-3 expression is a selective event during tumorigenesis.Interestingly, we noted a correlation between cluster expression and p53 status in the TGCT cell lines (Figure 4F).
5770) Whereas all three cluster-expressing cell lines contained high wt-p53 levels, NTera2 has low wild-type p53 levels, and NCCIT lost one p53 allele while the second allele is mutated (Burger et al., 1998).
5771) To strengthen the p53 connection seen in the TGCT cell lines, we examined p53 mutations in exons five to eight in the primary tumors, where the majority of mutations are found.
5773) Band intensity was calculated by densitometry.(D) The 3′-UTRs of LATS2 in human (Hs), mouse (Mm), and zebrafish (Dr) are shown, and the predicted miR-372&3 target sequences are marked.(E) The indicated vectors were transfected in miR-372&3-positive (Tera1) and negative (MCF-7) cell lines.
5775) In both primary human fibroblasts and in a TGCT-derived cell line, cells expressing miR-372&3 were insensitive to elevated levels of the cell-cycle inhibitor p21cip1.
5777) To this end, we determined the expression of the miR-371-3 cluster in several distinct somatic tumor cell lines and found little evidence for their expression (Figure S6).
5780) ZamoreNormal microRNA maturation and germ-line stem cell maintenance requires Loquacious, a double-stranded RNA-binding domain proteinPLoS Biol., 3 (2005), p.
5782) Looijenga2, Reuven Agami1, Corresponding author contact information, E-mail the corresponding authorShow morehttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.02.037  Open ArchiveSummaryEndogenous small RNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression by mechanisms conserved across metazoans.
5783) To perform genetic screens for novel functions of miRNAs, we developed a library of vectors expressing the majority of cloned human miRNAs and created corresponding DNA barcode arrays.
5784) These miRNAs neutralize p53-mediated CDK inhibition, possibly through direct inhibition of the expression of the tumor-suppressor LATS2.
5785) We provide evidence that these miRNAs are potential novel oncogenes participating in the development of human testicular germ cell tumors by numbing the p53 pathway, thus allowing tumorigenic growth in the presence of wild-type p53.IntroductionSince their discovery, the functions of only a handful of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been determined (recently reviewed in Zamore and Haley, 2005).
5786) However, the small number of miRNAs with a known function stresses the need for a systematic screening approach to identify more miRNA functions.The difficulties in deciphering the mechanism of action of miRNAs with a known function and deducing their activity from their sequence are largely due to the complex relationship with their target genes.
5787) In general, target genes containing sequences that are completely complementary to the miRNA will be degraded by an RNA-interference mechanism, whereas targets with partial complementary sequences at their 3′UTR will be subjected to translation inhibition and to a lesser extent also to mRNA degradation (Doench and Sharp, 2004, Bagga et al., 2005, Lim et al., 2005 and Pillai et al., 2005).
5788) In mammals, a near-perfect complementarity between miRNAs and protein coding genes almost never exists, making it difficult to directly pinpoint relevant downstream targets of a miRNA.
5789) These programs predict dozens to hundreds of target genes per miRNA, making it difficult to directly infer the cellular pathways affected by a given miRNA.
5790) Furthermore, the biological effect of the downregulation depends greatly on the cellular context, which exemplifies the need to deduce miRNA functions by in vivo genetic screens in well-defined model systems.The cancerous process can be modeled by in vitro neoplastic transformation assays in primary human cells (Hahn et al., 1999).
5791) Recently, these neoplastic transformation assays were used to uncover novel human tumor suppressor genes (Kolfschoten et al., 2005 and Westbrook et al., 2005).Moreover, oncogenes such as H-RASV12 provoke a stress response in primary cells that results in an irreversible growth arrest, termed premature senescence (Serrano et al., 1997).
5793) The elimination of this protective mechanism by, for example, the suppression of the p53 and p16INK4A pathways permits continued proliferation of the modified primary cells in the presence of the oncogenic event, consequently leading to tumorigenicity (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).Here, we use this model system to perform a functional genetic screen to identify miRNAs that act as oncogenes in tumorigenesis.
5794) We characterize two miRNAs whose expression can substitute for the loss of wild-type (wt) p53 that is needed to overcome oncogene-mediated arrest and implicate their involvement in the formation of testicular germ cell tumors.ResultsmiR-Vec: A Vector-Based miRNA Expression SystemTo identify novel functions of miRNAs, we constructed a retroviral vector for miRNA expression (miR-Vec) following a previously described approach (Chen et al., 2004).
5796) To examine miRNA expression from the miR-Vec system, a miR-24 minigene-containing virus was transduced into human cells.
5798) Figure 1C shows that cells transduced with miR-Vec-24 clearly express high levels of mature miR-24, whereas little expression was detected in control-transduced cells.
5802) Transcription of the minigene mimics the pri-miRNA, which is subsequently processed to a mature miRNA.(B) The RPA technique used to detect precursor and mature miRNAs in this study.(C) RPA was performed on RNA extracts from primary human BJ cells stably transduced with miR-Vec-24 and miR-Vec-ctrl.
5805) The signal derived from the spot corresponding to Mir-311 is indicated in pink.Figure optionsNext, we examined the functionality of the miR-Vec system to suppress gene expression by using both GFP, tagged with a sequence complementary to miR-19, and luciferase containing either the wt 3′UTR of G6PD, a predicted miR-1 target, or control with two mutated miR-1 binding sequences (Lewis et al., 2003).
5806) Using fluorescence microscopy and luciferase assays, we observed potent and specific miRNA activity expressed from each miR-Vec (Figure S2).
5807) These results demonstrate the general applicability of miR-Vec to drive functional miRNA expression.miR-Lib and miR-ArrayWe subsequently created a human miRNA expression library (miR-Lib) by cloning almost all annotated human miRNAs into our vector (Rfam release 6) (Figure S3).
5809) In accordance, we observed an approximately 4-fold increase in miR-311 signal, indicating that our procedure is sensitive enough to detect mild growth differences (Figure 1E).Expression of miR-372 and miR-373 Protects from Oncogenic StressIn response to mitogenic signals from oncogenes such as RASV12, primary human cells undergo a growth arrest (Figure 2A) (Serrano et al., 1997).
5810) To identify miRNAs that can interfere with this process and thus might contribute to the development of tumor cells, we transduced BJ/ET fibroblasts with miR-Lib and subsequently transduced them with either RASV12 or a control vector (Figure 2B).
5816) Identification of miR-Vecs that Inhibit Oncogene-Induced Senescence(A) The effects of oncogenic RASV12 on cellular growth.(B) A flow chart of the screen.
5818) The position of the reproducibly upregulated miR-Vecs is indicated for each experiment.(D) The miR-371-3 genomic organization and the sequences of the mature miRNAs expressed from this locus.
5824) The expression of either miR-371&2 or miR-373 allowed cells to continue proliferating in the presence of oncogenic stress, validating the effect observed with the miR-Array.Oncogene-induced senescence is characterized by the appearance of cells with a flat morphology that express senescence associated (SA)-β-Galactosidase.
5832) We also generated BJ/ET cells expressing the RASV12-ERTAM chimera gene, which is only active when tamoxifen is added (De Vita et al., 2005), and tranduced them with either YFP-tagged wt or mutant miR-Vec-371&2 and miR-Vec-373 constructs as well as p53kd, p14ARFkd, or control vectors.
5834) Once RASV12 was activated, the growth advantage of cells with miR-Vec-371&2 and 373 increased dramatically, indicating that these constructs allowed growth of cells in the presence of oncogenes while the rest of the population ceased to proliferate.
5837) The average and standard deviation of three independent dishes is shown.(E) The cluster, p53kd, and control cell populations from (C) were injected subcutaneously in athymic nude mice, and tumor growth was scored 5 weeks later.Figure optionsExpression of miR-372 and miR-373 Transforms Primary Human CellsSuppression of cellular senescence is essential for tumorigenesis.
5839) To mimic the expression of the complete miR-371-373 gene cluster, we made a miR-Vec expressing all miRNAs from one cluster (miR-Vec-cluster; see Figure 3A for expression).
5841) To shed more light on this aspect, we examined the effect of miR-372&3 expression on p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimulation.
5845) SD is from three independent experiments.(D) The expression of miR-372 was detected by RPA in RNA extracts from several TGCT cell lines as well as from primary seminoma and nonseminoma tumors and from normal testis tissues.(E) In situ hybridization on a nonseminoma of mixed histology to detect miR-372&3 expression.
5847) The EC component of the tumor was morphologically determined using HE-counter staining and by immunohistochemistry with anti-CD30 and OCT3/4 antibodies of the next sections.(F) Summary of the p53 status in several TGCT cell lines and primary seminomas (in the latter, only exons five to eight were examined).(G) NCCIT cells were cotransfected with H2B-GFP and the indicated constructs.
5849) In the presence of both miRNAs, and irrespective of RASV12 expression, IR induced a cell cycle arrest that was indistinguishable from control cells, whereas the suppression of p53 expression allowed, as expected, continuous DNA replication (Figure 4C and data not shown).
5850) These results indicate that although miR-372&3 confer complete protection to oncogene-induced senescence in a manner similar to p53 inactivation, the cellular response to DNA damage remains intact.Potential Role of miR-372 and miR-373 in Human CancerBased on the above results, we hypothesized that miRNA-372&3 may participate in tumorigenesis of some tumors that retain wt p53 and are sensitive to DNA-damaging treatments.
5851) This result is significant as no clear expression of the miR-371-3 cluster was detected in any of the somatic cell lines we tested (originating from breast, colon, lung and brain tumors) (Figure S6).TGCTs are divided into seminomas, non-seminomas, and spermatocytic-seminoma, according to their origin, clinical behavior, and chromosomal constitution (Oosterhuis and Looijenga, 2005).
5852) Noteworthy is the fact that endogenous expression of miR-372 reached levels that are comparable to those driven by miR-Vec-372 (Figure 4D), indicating the biological relevance of our system in primary human fibroblast cells.
5855) In many of the miR-371-3 expressing seminomas and nonseminomas, miR-302a-d was undetectable (Figures S7 and S8), suggesting that miR-371-3 expression is a selective event during tumorigenesis.Interestingly, we noted a correlation between cluster expression and p53 status in the TGCT cell lines (Figure 4F).
5856) Whereas all three cluster-expressing cell lines contained high wt-p53 levels, NTera2 has low wild-type p53 levels, and NCCIT lost one p53 allele while the second allele is mutated (Burger et al., 1998).
5857) To strengthen the p53 connection seen in the TGCT cell lines, we examined p53 mutations in exons five to eight in the primary tumors, where the majority of mutations are found.
5859) Altogether, these results strongly suggest that the expression of miR-372/3 suppresses the p53 pathway to an extent sufficient to allow oncogenic mutations to accumulate in TGCTs.We then decided to test directly the correlation between the p53 pathway and miR-372/3 expression in TGCTs.
5860) It was technically not possible to sufficiently and persistently inhibit the expression of both miR-372 and miR-373 by methylated miRNA-oligos or knockdown vectors against the loop of the precursors (as judged by miR-372 and miR-373 luciferase reporter targets; data not shown).
5866) From the list of genes whose expression was 2- or more fold lower in the cluster-expressing cells, we used target prediction programs to find possible direct targets of miR-372&3.
5868) It was recently shown that lymphocytes from mice nullizygous for Suv39-H1 are resistant to oncogene-induced senescence (Braig et al., 2005).
5871) Band intensity was calculated by densitometry.(D) The 3′-UTRs of LATS2 in human (Hs), mouse (Mm), and zebrafish (Dr) are shown, and the predicted miR-372&3 target sequences are marked.(E) The indicated vectors were transfected in miR-372&3-positive (Tera1) and negative (MCF-7) cell lines.
5873) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
5875) These results show that a combined effect of RNA destruction and translation inhibition is used by miR-372&3 to silence LATS2.miR-372/3 was predicted to bind two sites in the 3′UTR of LATS2 that are highly conserved between human, mouse, and zebrafish (Figure 5D).
5876) To further substantiate LATS2 as a direct target of miR372&3, we cloned its 3′UTR downstream of the firefly luciferase gene (pGL3-LATS2).
5878) Significantly, a potent inhibition of luciferase activity was also mediated by the 3′UTR of LATS2 in either MCF-7 ectopically expressing miR-372 or in Tera1 cells but not by a construct mutated at both miR-372-predicted target sites.
5881) Therefore, these results point to LATS2 as a mediator of the miR-372 and miR-373 effects on cell proliferation and tumorigenicity, although they do not exclude the participation of other direct miR-targets, such as Suv39-H1, in these processes.
5882) Further investigation should elucidate the exact role of LATS2 downregulation and the possible participation of other miR-372&3-targets in the overall observed miR effect on cellular transformation.DiscussionFunctional Genetic Screens for miRNAsWe developed a miRNA-expression vector library and a corresponding barcode array to detect miRNAs whose expression modifies a defined cellular pathway.
5883) We demonstrate here the power of this technology by the identification of miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as potential oncogenes that collaborate with oncogenic RAS in cellular transformation (Figure 5G).
5884) This indicates that miRNA-372&3 do not block RASV12 signals but rather allow cells to proliferate irrespective of p53 activation and induction of p21cip1.The expression of miR-372&3 results in prevention of the CDK inhibition that is caused by the oncogenic stress response.
5886) Indeed, the expression of LATS2 is directly controlled by miR-372&3, and its activity is important for RASV12-induced senescence.
5887) However, further investigation is required to demonstrate the exact mechanism of LATS2 action and whether there are other targets of miR-372&3, such as Suv39H1, that are relevant to this phenotype.Correlations to Other miRNAsBased on the seed sequence, the miR-372&3 gene family also includes miR-93 and miR-302a-e.
5888) Indeed, preliminary results show that similar to miR-372&3, albeit with minor differences, both miR-93 and miR-302a-e can effectively target the LATS2 3′UTR and bypass oncogene-induced senescence (manuscript in preparation).Role of miR372&3 in TGCT DevelopmentOur results suggest that during transformation, the activities of miR-372&3 circumvented the need to mutate p53, leading to a DNA-damage-sensitive transformed phenotype.
5889) Altogether, these provide a strong indication that there is no selective advantage to mutate p53 during TGCT development when the miR-371-3 cluster is expressed.The potent role of miR-372&3 in cellular transformation and potentially in TGCT development raises the possibility that they may play a similar role in somatic tumors.
5890) It is therefore most likely that the expression of miR-371-3 in primary TGCT is not merely a remnant of their ES cell phenotype but rather a selective event during TGCT tumorigenesis.Function of miRNA372&3 in Embryonic Stem CellsOur results suggest a link between the expression of miR-372&3 in embryonic stem cells and their function in cellular proliferation in these cells.
5891) The proliferation defect in Drosophila mutants that lack miRNAs could be alleviated by loss of dacapo, the Drosophila p21cip1 homolog ( Forstemann et al., 2005 and Hatfield et al., 2005).Our results indicate that due to enhanced tolerance to oncogenic mutations, deregulated expression of miR-372&3 predisposes cells for accumulation of carcinogenic events.
5892) Nevertheless, our experiments stress the importance of a strong downregulation of factors that maintain rapid cell proliferation, as in the absence of this downregulation safeguard mechanisms against oncogene emergence are functionally impaired.Experimental ProceduresConstructspMSCV-Blast and pMSCV-YFP were made by replacing the puromycin resistance marker of pMSCV-puro (Clontech) with a PCR product encoding the blasticidin resistance gene from cDNA6/TR (invitrogen) or YFP from pEYFP-N1 (Clontech), respectively.
5895) The constructs encoding Luciferase-3′-G6PD wt and mut were a kind gift of David Bartel (Lewis et al., 2003).The miRNA minigenes were PCR amplified from genomic human DNA, cloned downstream of the CMV promoter in miR-Vec, and sequence verified.
5909) The genes that decreased 2-fold or more were further screened for possible miR-372/3 target sites using a local version of the TargetScan algorithm (Lewis et al., 2003) with default parameters (http://www.mekentosj.com/targetscanner).AcknowledgmentsWe thank Martijn Kedde and Hugo Horlings for technical help, Ron Kerkhoven and Mike Heimerikx for support in microarray analysis, Steve de Jong for reagents, Wigard Kloosterman for help in miRNA-in situ protocol, J.
5944) BokemeyerMolecular determinants of treatment response in human germ cell tumorsClin.
5966) In a screen for miRNAs that cooperate with oncogenes in cellular transformation, we identified miR-372 and miR-373, each permitting proliferation and tumorigenesis of primary human cells that harbor both oncogenic RAS and active wild-type p53.
5967) However, the small number of miRNAs with a known function stresses the need for a systematic screening approach to identify more miRNA functions.The difficulties in deciphering the mechanism of action of miRNAs with a known function and deducing their activity from their sequence are largely due to the complex relationship with their target genes.
5968) Using fluorescence microscopy and luciferase assays, we observed potent and specific miRNA activity expressed from each miR-Vec (Figure S2).
5969) We also generated BJ/ET cells expressing the RASV12-ERTAM chimera gene, which is only active when tamoxifen is added (De Vita et al., 2005), and tranduced them with either YFP-tagged wt or mutant miR-Vec-371&2 and miR-Vec-373 constructs as well as p53kd, p14ARFkd, or control vectors.
5971) Once RASV12 was activated, the growth advantage of cells with miR-Vec-371&2 and 373 increased dramatically, indicating that these constructs allowed growth of cells in the presence of oncogenes while the rest of the population ceased to proliferate.
5973) These results demonstrate that miR-372&3 collaborate with RAS in transformation in a manner that resembles p53 inactivation.Importantly, our results so far indicate that the expression of miR-372&3 did not reduce the activity of RASV12, as these cells were still growing faster than normal cells and were tumorigenic, for which RAS activity is indispensable (Hahn et al., 1999 and Kolfschoten et al., 2005).
5975) To shed more light on this aspect, we examined the effect of miR-372&3 expression on p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimulation.
5977) Figure 4A shows that following RASV12 stimulation, p53 was stabilized and activated, and its target gene, p21cip1, was induced in all cases, indicating an intact p53 pathway in these cells.
5981) In both miR-372&3-expressing cells, CDK2 remained active following RASV12 induction, whereas it was inhibited in the control cells (Figure 4B).
5983) These results indicate that although miR-372&3 confer complete protection to oncogene-induced senescence in a manner similar to p53 inactivation, the cellular response to DNA damage remains intact.Potential Role of miR-372 and miR-373 in Human CancerBased on the above results, we hypothesized that miRNA-372&3 may participate in tumorigenesis of some tumors that retain wt p53 and are sensitive to DNA-damaging treatments.
5991) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
5992) Significantly, a potent inhibition of luciferase activity was also mediated by the 3′UTR of LATS2 in either MCF-7 ectopically expressing miR-372 or in Tera1 cells but not by a construct mutated at both miR-372-predicted target sites.
5994) This indicates that miRNA-372&3 do not block RASV12 signals but rather allow cells to proliferate irrespective of p53 activation and induction of p21cip1.The expression of miR-372&3 results in prevention of the CDK inhibition that is caused by the oncogenic stress response.
5995) Indeed, the expression of LATS2 is directly controlled by miR-372&3, and its activity is important for RASV12-induced senescence.
5996) Indeed, preliminary results show that similar to miR-372&3, albeit with minor differences, both miR-93 and miR-302a-e can effectively target the LATS2 3′UTR and bypass oncogene-induced senescence (manuscript in preparation).Role of miR372&3 in TGCT DevelopmentOur results suggest that during transformation, the activities of miR-372&3 circumvented the need to mutate p53, leading to a DNA-damage-sensitive transformed phenotype.
5997) Which factors control miR-371-3 expression during differentiation and whether their activity is causally related to development of TGCTs remain to be explored.
6000) AgamiA genetic screen identifies PITX1 as a suppressor of RAS activity and tumorigenicityCell, 121 (2005), pp.
6002) In a screen for miRNAs that cooperate with oncogenes in cellular transformation, we identified miR-372 and miR-373, each permitting proliferation and tumorigenesis of primary human cells that harbor both oncogenic RAS and active wild-type p53.
6003) We provide evidence that these miRNAs are potential novel oncogenes participating in the development of human testicular germ cell tumors by numbing the p53 pathway, thus allowing tumorigenic growth in the presence of wild-type p53.IntroductionSince their discovery, the functions of only a handful of microRNAs (miRNAs) have been determined (recently reviewed in Zamore and Haley, 2005).
6005) For example, the joint expression of the telomerase reverse transcriptase subunit (hTERT), oncogenic H-RASV12, and SV40-small t antigen combined with the suppression of p53 and p16INK4A were sufficient to render primary human fibroblasts tumorigenic (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).
6006) Recently, these neoplastic transformation assays were used to uncover novel human tumor suppressor genes (Kolfschoten et al., 2005 and Westbrook et al., 2005).Moreover, oncogenes such as H-RASV12 provoke a stress response in primary cells that results in an irreversible growth arrest, termed premature senescence (Serrano et al., 1997).
6007) The elimination of this protective mechanism by, for example, the suppression of the p53 and p16INK4A pathways permits continued proliferation of the modified primary cells in the presence of the oncogenic event, consequently leading to tumorigenicity (Voorhoeve and Agami, 2003).Here, we use this model system to perform a functional genetic screen to identify miRNAs that act as oncogenes in tumorigenesis.
6008) We characterize two miRNAs whose expression can substitute for the loss of wild-type (wt) p53 that is needed to overcome oncogene-mediated arrest and implicate their involvement in the formation of testicular germ cell tumors.ResultsmiR-Vec: A Vector-Based miRNA Expression SystemTo identify novel functions of miRNAs, we constructed a retroviral vector for miRNA expression (miR-Vec) following a previously described approach (Chen et al., 2004).
6009) In accordance, we observed an approximately 4-fold increase in miR-311 signal, indicating that our procedure is sensitive enough to detect mild growth differences (Figure 1E).Expression of miR-372 and miR-373 Protects from Oncogenic StressIn response to mitogenic signals from oncogenes such as RASV12, primary human cells undergo a growth arrest (Figure 2A) (Serrano et al., 1997).
6010) This escape from oncogene-induced senescence is a prerequisite for full transformation into tumor cells.
6011) Identification of miR-Vecs that Inhibit Oncogene-Induced Senescence(A) The effects of oncogenic RASV12 on cellular growth.(B) A flow chart of the screen.
6012) The expression of either miR-371&2 or miR-373 allowed cells to continue proliferating in the presence of oncogenic stress, validating the effect observed with the miR-Array.Oncogene-induced senescence is characterized by the appearance of cells with a flat morphology that express senescence associated (SA)-β-Galactosidase.
6013) Once RASV12 was activated, the growth advantage of cells with miR-Vec-371&2 and 373 increased dramatically, indicating that these constructs allowed growth of cells in the presence of oncogenes while the rest of the population ceased to proliferate.
6016) To shed more light on this aspect, we examined the effect of miR-372&3 expression on p53 activation in response to oncogenic stimulation.
6018) These results indicate that although miR-372&3 confer complete protection to oncogene-induced senescence in a manner similar to p53 inactivation, the cellular response to DNA damage remains intact.Potential Role of miR-372 and miR-373 in Human CancerBased on the above results, we hypothesized that miRNA-372&3 may participate in tumorigenesis of some tumors that retain wt p53 and are sensitive to DNA-damaging treatments.
6019) Altogether, these results strongly suggest that the expression of miR-372/3 suppresses the p53 pathway to an extent sufficient to allow oncogenic mutations to accumulate in TGCTs.We then decided to test directly the correlation between the p53 pathway and miR-372/3 expression in TGCTs.
6021) It was recently shown that lymphocytes from mice nullizygous for Suv39-H1 are resistant to oncogene-induced senescence (Braig et al., 2005).
6022) An accompanying immunoblot shows that only LATS2kd#2 is functional.(G) A schematic model showing the mechanism through which miR-372&3 can suppress an oncogene-activated p53 pathway.Figure optionsTo investigate the possibility that miR-372 and miR-373 suppress the expression of LATS2, we performed immunoblot analysis of cells expressing wt and mutant miR-372&3, the cluster and the controls p53kd and empty vector.
6023) We demonstrate here the power of this technology by the identification of miRNA-372 and miRNA-373 as potential oncogenes that collaborate with oncogenic RAS in cellular transformation (Figure 5G).
6024) Furthermore, the miR-Lib tool can be used in a single-well format to identify growth-independent phenotypes.Collaboration of miRNA372&3 and RASV12 in TumorigenesisSustained proliferation of cells in the presence of oncogenic signals is a major leap toward tumorigenicity (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000).
6025) This indicates that miRNA-372&3 do not block RASV12 signals but rather allow cells to proliferate irrespective of p53 activation and induction of p21cip1.The expression of miR-372&3 results in prevention of the CDK inhibition that is caused by the oncogenic stress response.
6026) Indeed, preliminary results show that similar to miR-372&3, albeit with minor differences, both miR-93 and miR-302a-e can effectively target the LATS2 3′UTR and bypass oncogene-induced senescence (manuscript in preparation).Role of miR372&3 in TGCT DevelopmentOur results suggest that during transformation, the activities of miR-372&3 circumvented the need to mutate p53, leading to a DNA-damage-sensitive transformed phenotype.
6027) The proliferation defect in Drosophila mutants that lack miRNAs could be alleviated by loss of dacapo, the Drosophila p21cip1 homolog ( Forstemann et al., 2005 and Hatfield et al., 2005).Our results indicate that due to enhanced tolerance to oncogenic mutations, deregulated expression of miR-372&3 predisposes cells for accumulation of carcinogenic events.
6028) Nevertheless, our experiments stress the importance of a strong downregulation of factors that maintain rapid cell proliferation, as in the absence of this downregulation safeguard mechanisms against oncogene emergence are functionally impaired.Experimental ProceduresConstructspMSCV-Blast and pMSCV-YFP were made by replacing the puromycin resistance marker of pMSCV-puro (Clontech) with a PCR product encoding the blasticidin resistance gene from cDNA6/TR (invitrogen) or YFP from pEYFP-N1 (Clontech), respectively.
6030) HammondA microRNA polycistron as a potential human oncogeneNature, 435 (2005), pp.
